<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Appendix C</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="appendix-c" epub:type="appendix">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Appendix C</h2>
			<p>[The following is given as a specimen of the nonsense of which the various continuations are made up.]</p>
			<section id="appendix-c-continuation-13" epub:type="chapter z3998:fiction">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title"><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Continuatio</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span></h3>
					<p epub:type="subtitle">How Simplicissimus in Return for a Night’s Lodging, Taught His Host a Curious Art</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>Now the evening before this I had lost a certain catalogue of those special arts which I had aforetime practised and written down that I might not forget them so easily: yet I depended not on this to remember how to perform them and with what helps. For example I do here set down the beginning of this list:</p>
				<ul>
					<li>
						<p>So to prepare matches or fuses that they shall give out no smell, seeing that by such smell musketeers be often betrayed and their plans defeated.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>To prepare match so that it will burn though it be wet.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>To prepare powder so that it will not burn though red-hot steel be thrust therein: very useful for fortresses that must harbour much of so dangerous a guest.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>To shoot men or birds with powder alone so that they shall lie as dead for a while and yet rise up again without harm.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>To give a man double strength without the use of carbine-thistle or other such forbidden means.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>If a sally from a fortress be checked, so to spike the enemy’s guns in a moment that they must burst.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>To spoil a man’s gun so that it will scare all game to cover till it be again cleansed with a certain other substance.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>To hit the bull’s-eye in a target more quickly by laying the gun on the shoulder and firing backward, than if a man should take aim and fire in the accustomed way.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>A special art to provide that no bullet may hit thee.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>To prepare an instrument by means of which, specially on a still night, a man can in wondrous wise hear all that sounds or is spoken at an incredible distance (otherwise clean impossible and supernatural); very profitable for sentries and specially in sieges, <abbr>etc.</abbr> (<abbr>bk.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, <abbr>chap.</abbr> 1).</p>
					</li>
				</ul>
				<p>In like manner were many arts described in the said catalogue which mine host had found and read: so he came to me himself into my chamber, showed me the list, and asked whether ’twas possible that these things could be done by natural means; for that could he scarce believe; yet must confess that in his youth, when he served as a page in Italy with Field-marshal von Schauenburg, it was given out by some that the princes of Savoy were proof against bullets: which the said Field-marshal desired to make proof of in the person of Prince Thomas, whom he then kept besieged in a fortress; for when on a time both sides had agreed on a truce for an hour to bury the dead and to confer together, he had commanded a corporal of his regiment, that was held to be the best marksman in the whole army, to take aim at the said prince while he should be standing on the parapet of the wall for a parley, and so soon as the hour agreed upon should end, to fire at him with his piece, with which he could put a lighted candle out at fifty paces: that this corporal had taken careful note of the time and kept the said prince under observation the whole time of the truce, and at the very moment when it ended with the first stroke of the hour, fired at him: yet had his piece, contrary to all belief, missed fire, and before the corporal could make ready again the prince was gone behind the parapet; whereupon the corporal pointed out to the Field-marshal, who had likewise come to him on the trenches, a Switzer of the prince’s guard, at whom he aimed and hit him in such fashion that he rolled over and over; wherefrom it plainly appeared that there was something in the story that no prince of the house of Savoy could be hit or harmed. Yet whether this was brought about by such arts, or whether perchance the said princely house enjoyed a special grace from God, being, as ’twas said, sprung from the race of the royal prophet David, he knew not.</p>
				<p>I answered, “I know not either, but this I do know of a surety, that the arts here specified be natural and no witchcraft.” Which if he would not believe, let him but say which he held to be the most wonderful and impossible and I would at once to satisfy him (provided only that ’twas one that asked not long time but only such means as I had then at hand), make trial of it, for I must presently be afoot and pursue my journey. At that he said this seemed to him the most impossible, that gunpowder should not burn if fire were put to it, unless one should first pour the powder into water; which if I could by natural means effect he would believe concerning all the other arts, though there were over sixty of them, what he might not see and before such trial could not believe. I answered, let him bring me quickly a charge of powder and also a certain substance which I had need of, and fire also, and presently he should see that the trick would hold. This being done, I caused him to follow my process and then set light to the powder: yet could he do no more than burn here and there a grain though he worked at it for a quarter of an hour, and accomplished no more than that he cooled a red-hot iron and quenched matches and lighted coals in the very powder itself. “Aha!” says he, “the powder is bad.” But I answered him in act, and without much ado, before he could count a score, so worked it that the powder blew up when he had scarce touched it with the fire.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
