<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-4" id="chapter-4-13" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:title">XIII: HOW OLIVER CONCEIVED THAT HE COULD EXCUSE HIS BRIGAND'S TRICKS</h3>


<p class="continue">A determined soldier whose business it is to hold his life cheap and to
adventure it easily, is but a stupid creature. Out of a thousand
fellows you could hardly have found one that would have gone as a guest
to an unknown place with one that had even now tried to murder him. On
the way I asked him which army he was of. So he said, he served no
prince but was his own master, and asked of what party I was. I
answered I had served the Duke of Weimar but had now my discharge, and
was minded to betake myself home. Then he asked my name, and when I
said "Simplicius" he turned him round (for I made him walk before me
because I trusted him not) and looked me straight in the face. "Is not
thy name also Simplicissimus?" quoth he. "Yea," says I, "he is a rogue
that denies his own name: and who art thou?" "Why, brother," he
answered, "I am Oliver, whom thou wilt surely remember before
Magdeburg." With that he cast away his gun and fell on his knees to beg
for my pardon that he had meant to do me an ill turn, saying he could
well conceive he could have no better friend in the world than he would
find in me, since according to old Herzbruder's prophecy I was so
bravely to avenge his death. And I for my part did wonder at so strange
a meeting, but he said, "This is nothing new: mountain and valley can
never meet, but what is truly strange is this, that I from a secretary
have become a footpad and thou from a fool a brave soldier. Be ye sure,
brother, that if there were ten thousand like us, we could relieve
Breisach to-morrow and in the end make ourselves masters of the whole
world."</p>

<p>With such talk we came at nightfall to a little remote labourer's
cottage: and though such boasting pleased me not, yet I said "Yea,"
chiefly because his rogue's temper was well known to me, and though I
trusted him not at all, yet went I with him into the said house, in
which a peasant was even then lighting a fire: to him said Oliver,
"Hast thou aught ready cooked?" "Nay," said the peasant, "but I have
still the cold leg of veal that I brought from Waldkirch." "Well then,"
said Oliver, "go bring it here and likewise the little cask of wine."
So when the peasant was gone, "Brother," said I (for so I called him to
be safer with him) "thou hast a willing host." "Oh, devil thank the
rogue," says he, "I do keep his wife and child for him and also he doth
earn good booty for himself; for I do leave for him all the clothes
that I capture, for him to turn to his own profit." So I asked where he
kept his wife and child; to which Oliver answered, he had them in
safety in Freiburg, where he visited them twice a week, and brought him
from thence his food, as well as powder and shot. And further he told
me he had long practised this freebooter's trade, and that it profited
him more than to serve any lord: nor did he think to give it up till he
had properly filled his purse. "Brother," says I, "thou livest in a
dangerous estate, and if thou art caught in such a villainy, how
thinkest thou 'twould fare with thee?" "Aha," says he, "I perceive thou
art still the old Simplicissimus: I know well that he that would win
must stake somewhat: but remember that their lordships<a href="#div2Ref_31" id="div2_31" class="pginternal"><sup>[31]</sup></a> of Nuremberg
hang no man till they catch him." So I answered, "Yea, but put the
case, brother, that thou art not caught, which is yet but unlikely,
since the pitcher that goes often to the well must break at last, yet
is such a life as thou leadest the most shameful in the world, so that
I scarce can believe thou canst desire to die in it."</p>

<p>"What?" says he, "the most shameful? My brave Simplicissimus, I assure
thee that robbery is the most noble exercise that one in these days can
find in the world. Tell me how many kingdoms and principalities be
there that have not been stolen by violence and so taken. Or is it ever
counted for evil of a king or a prince in the whole world that he
enjoys the revenues of his lands, which commonly have been gained by
his forefathers with violence and conquest? Yea, what could be named
more noble than the trade that I now follow? I well perceive that thou
wouldst fain preach me a sermon showing how many have been hanged,
drawn, and quartered for murder and robbery: but that I know already,
for so the laws do command: yet wilt thou see none but poor and
miserable thieves so put to death, as they indeed deserve for
undertaking this noble craft, which is reserved for men of high parts
and capacity. But when hast thou ever seen a person of quality punished
by justice for that he has oppressed his people too much? Yea, and more
than that, when is the usurer punished, that yet doth pursue this noble
trade in secret, and that too under the cloak of Christian love? Why,
then, should I be punishable, I that practise it openly without
concealment or hypocrisy? My good Simplicissimus, thou hast never read
thy Machiavel. I am a man of honest mood, and do follow this manner of
life openly and without shame. I do fight and do adventure my life upon
it like the heroes of old, and do know that such trades, and likewise
he that follows them, stand ever in peril: but since I do adventure my
life thereupon, it doth follow without contradiction that 'tis but just
and fair I should be allowed to follow my trade."</p>

<p>To that I answered, "Whether robbery and theft be allowed to thee or
not, yet do I know that this is against the order of nature, that will
not have it so that any man should do to another what he would not have
done to himself. And this is wrong, too, as against the laws of this
world, which ordain that thieves shall be hanged and robbers beheaded
and murderers broken on the wheel: and lastly, 'tis also against the
laws of God, which is the chiefest point of all: for He doth leave no
sin unpunished." "Yea," said Oliver, "'tis as I said: thou art still
the same old Simplicissimus that hath not yet studied his Machiavel:
but if I could but set up a monarchy in this fashion, then would I fain
see who would preach to me against it."</p>

<p>And so had we disputed longer: but then came the peasant with meat and
drink, and so we sat together and appeased our hunger, of which I at
least had much need.</p>




		</section>
	</body>
</html>
