<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-3" id="chapter-3-19" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:title">XIX: BY WHAT MEANS THE HUNTSMAN MADE FRIENDS, AND HOW HE WAS MOVED BY A SERMON</h3>


<p class="continue">When Fortune will cast a man down, she raiseth him first to the
heights, and the good God doth faithfully warn every man before his
fall. Such a warning had I, but would have none of it. For I was
stiffly persuaded of this, that my fortune was so firmly founded that
no mishap could cast me down, because all, and specially the commandant
himself, wished me well; those that he valued I won over by all manner
of respect: his trusted servants I brought over to my side by presents,
and with them perhaps more than with mine equals I did drink
"Brotherhood" and swore to them everlasting faith and friendship: so,
too, the common citizens and soldiers loved me because I had a friendly
word for all. "What a kindly man," said they often, "is the huntsman;
He will talk with a child in the street, and hath a quarrel with no
man!" If I had shot a hare or a few partridges I would send them to the
kitchen of those whose friendship I sought, and also invited myself as
a guest; at which time I would always have a sup of wine (which was in
that place very dear) brought thither also: yea, I would so contrive it
that the whole cost would fall upon me. And when at such banquets I
fell in converse with any, I had praise for all save myself, and
managed so to feign humility as I had never known pride. So because I
thus gained the favour of all, and all thought much of me, I never
conceived that any misfortune could encounter me, especially since my
purse was still pretty well filled. Often I went to the oldest priest
of the town, who lent me many books from his library: and when I
brought one back then would he discourse of all manner of matters with
me, for we became so familiar together that one could easily bear with
the other. So when not only the Martinmas goose and the feast of
pudding-broth were gone and over, but also the Christmas holidays, I
presented to him for the New Year a bottle of Strassburg Branntwein,
the which he, after Westphalian use, liked to sip with sugar-candy, and
thereafter came to visit him, even as he was a-reading my "Joseph the
Chaste," which my host without my knowledge had lent him. I did blush
that my work should fall into the hands of so learned a man, especially
because men hold that one is best known by what he writes. But he would
have me to sit by him and praised my invention, yet blamed me that I
had lingered so long over the love-story of Zuleika (which was
Potiphar's wife). "Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth
speaketh," said he moreover, "and if my friend had not known how it
fares with a wooer's heart he could never so well have treated of this
woman's passion or in so lively fashion pictured it."</p>

<p>I answered that what I had written was not mine own invention but
extracted from other books to give me some practice in writing. "Yes,
yes," says he, "of course I am pleased to believe it: yet may you be
sure I know more of your honour than he conceives." At these words I
was dismayed and thought, "Hath a little bird told thee?" But he,
seeing how I changed colour, went on to say, "Ye are lively and young,
idle and handsome. Ye do live a careless life, and as I hear in all
luxury: therefore do I beseech you in the Lord and exhort you to
consider in what an evil case you stand: beware of the beast with the
long hair, if you have any care for your happiness and health. Ye may
perhaps say, 'How concerneth it the priest what I do or not?' ('Rightly
guessed,' said I to myself) or, 'What right hath he to command me?'
'Tis true I have but the care of souls: but, sir, be assured that your
temporal good, as that of my benefactor, is for mere Christian love as
precious as if ye were mine own son. 'Tis ever a pity, and never can ye
answer such a charge before your heavenly Father if ye do bury the
talent He hath entrusted to you and leave to go to ruin that noble
understanding which I do perceive in this your writing. My faithful and
fatherly advice would be, ye should employ your youth and your means,
which ye now do waste in such purposeless wise, to study, that some day
ye may be helpful to God and man and yourself; and let war alone, in
which, as I do hear, ye have so great a delight; and before ye get a
shrewd knock and find the truth of that saying, 'Young soldiers make
old beggars.'" This predication I listened to with great impatience,
for I was not used to hear the like: yet I shewed not how I felt, lest
I should forfeit my reputation for politeness, but thanked him much for
his straightforwardness and promised him to reflect upon his advice:
yet thought I within myself, what did it concern the priest how I
ordered my life; for just then I was at the height of my good fortune,
and I could not do without those pleasures of dalliance I had once
enjoyed. So is it ever with such warnings, when youth is unaccustomed
to bit and bridle, and gallops hard away to meet destruction.</p>




		</section>
	</body>
</html>
