<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-4" id="chapter-4-9" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:title">IX: WHEREFORE CLERGYMEN SHOULD NEVER EAT HARES THAT HAVE BEEN TAKEN IN A SNARE</h3>


<p class="continue">Now hath the gentle reader heard in what danger of life I put myself.
But as concerns the danger of my soul 'tis to be understood that as a
musqueteer I became a right desperate fellow, that cared naught for God
and his word. No wickedness was for me too great: and all the
goodnesses and loving kindnesses that I had ever received from God
quite forgotten: and so I cared neither for this world nor the next but
lived like a beast. None would have believed that I had been brought up
with a pious hermit: seldom I went to church and never to confess: and
because I cared so little for my own soul's health, therefore I
troubled my fellow men yet more. Where I could cheat a man I failed not
to do it, yea I prided myself upon it, so that none came off scot-free
from his dealings with me. From this I often got me a whipping, and
still more often the torture-horse; yea, I was often threatened with
the strappado and the gibbet: but naught availed: I went on in my
godless career till it seemed I would play the desperado and run
post-haste to hell. And though I did no deed evil enough to forfeit my
life, yet was I so reckless that, save for sorcerers and sodomites, no
worse man could be found.</p>

<p>Of this our regiment's chaplain was ware, and being a right zealous
saver of souls, at Eastertide he sent for me to know why I had not been
at Confession and Holy Communion. But I treated his many faithful
warnings as I had done those of the good pastor at Lippstadt, so that
the good man could make naught of me. So when it seemed as if Christ
and His Baptism were lost in me, at the end says he, "O miserable man:
I had believed that thou didst err through ignorance: now know I that
thou goest on in thy sins from pure wickedness and of malice
aforethought. Who, thinkest thou, can feel compassion for thy poor soul
and its damnation? For my part, I protest before God and the world that
I am free of guilt as to that damnation; for I have done, and would
have gone on to do without wearying, all that was necessary to further
thy salvation. But henceforward 'twill not be my duty to do more than
to provide that thy body, when thy poor soul shall leave it in such a
desperate state, shall be conveyed to no dedicated place there to be
buried with other departed pious Christians, but to the carrion-pit
with the carcases of dead beasts, or to that place where are bestowed
other God-forgotten and desperate men." Yet this severe threatening
bore as little fruit as the earlier warnings, and that for this reason
only, that I was shamed to confess. O fool that I was! For often I
would tell of my knaves' tricks in great company and would lie to make
them seem the greater; yet now, when I should be converted and confess
my sins to a single man, and him standing in God's place, to receive
absolution, then was I as a stock or a stone. I say the truth: I was
stockish; and stockish I remained: for I answered, "I do serve the
Emperor as a soldier: and if I die as a soldier, 'twill be no wonder if
I, like other soldiers (which cannot always be buried in holy ground,
but must be content to lie anywhere on the field in ditches or in the
maw of wolf and raven), must make shift outside the churchyard."</p>

<p>And so I left the priest, which for his holy zeal for souls had no more
return from me than that once I refused him a hare, which he urgently
begged from me, on the pretence that since it had hanged itself in a
noose and so taken its own life, therefore as a self-murderer it might
not be buried in a holy place.</p>




		</section>
	</body>
</html>
