<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-5" id="chapter-5-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:title">V: HOW SIMPLICISSIMUS RODE COURIER AND IN THE LIKENESS OF MERCURY LEARNED FROM JOVE WHAT HIS DESIGN WAS AS REGARDS WAR AND PEACE</h3>


<p class="continue">So as soon as Herzbruder could ride we despatched our money (for now we
had but one purse in common) by way of banker's draft to Basel,
equipped ourselves with horses and servants, and made our way up the
Danube to Ulm and thence to the Spa before mentioned, for now 'twas May
and pleasant travelling. There did we hire a lodging: but I rid to
Strassburg, not only to receive in part our money which we had conveyed
thither by way of Basel, but also to inquire for the medicos of
experience that should prescribe for Herzbruder recipes and the manner
of his taking the baths. These came to me, and were of opinion that
Herzbruder had indeed been poisoned, yet was the poison not strong
enough to kill him offhand, and therefore it had made its way into his
limbs, from whence it must be evacuated by drugs, antidotes and
sweating-baths, which cure would last some eight weeks or so. At that
Herzbruder remembered at once when and by whom that poison had been
given him; namely, by them that would have had his place in the army:
and when he further learned from the physicians that his cure needed no
spa, then was he assured the field-surgeon had by his enemies been
bribed to send him so far away: yet did he resolve to complete his cure
there at the spa, for 'twas not only a healthy air but also there was
cheerful company among the bathing-guests.</p>

<p>This time would I not waste: for I had a desire to see my wife once
more: and since Herzbruder needed me not greatly, I did open to him my
project, which he did praise, and advised me I should visit her, giving
me also certain trinkets of price which I should on his behalf present
to her, and therewith beg her pardon for that he had been the cause why
I had not before sought her out. With that I rode to Strassburg, and
not only provided myself with moneys but inquired also how I might
prosecute my journey in the safest way: whereupon I found 'twas not to
be accomplished by a horseman riding alone; for the roads were made
unsafe by the parties sent out from so many garrisons of the two
contending armies. So I got me a pass for a post-rider of Strassburg,
and drew up certain letters to my wife, her sisters, and her parents,
as I would send him with them to Lippstadt: yet feigned to be of a
different mind, took back the pass from the messenger, sent back my
horse and servant, and disguised myself in a red and white livery: in
that I journeyed by ship to Cologne, which was at that time neutral
between the two parties.</p>

<p>And first I must go to visit my Jupiter, that had aforetime appointed
me his Ganymede, to ask how it fared with the property I had left
there: but him I found quite brain-sick again and full of anger against
the human race. "O Mercury," says he, as soon as he saw me, "what news
from Münster? Do men conceive they can make peace without my good will?
Nay, never! they did have peace. Why kept they it not? Was not vice
everywhere triumphant when they provoked me to send them war? And how
have they deserved that I should give them peace again? Have they since
been converted? Are they not become worse, and do they not run into war
as to a festival? Or have they perchance repented them by reason of the
famine that I sent among them, whereof so many thousands died of
hunger? Or hath the grievous pestilence terrified them to better their
ways, whereby so many millions were cut off? Nay, nay, Mercurius, they
that remain, that did see these dreadful sufferings with their own
eyes, have not only not repented, but be grown worse than ever they
were. And if they have not been turned by so many sore plagues, nor
have ceased to live in godless wise in the midst of such trial and
tribulation, what will they do if I should grant them again the
delights of golden peace? Then must I fear lest, as once did the
giants, so they now should try to storm my heaven. But such overweening
I will check in good time and leave them to perish in their war." But I
knowing how one must go about with this god if one would make him hear
reason, "Oh, great god," says I, "all the world doth sigh for peace and
promise great amendment: why wilt thou then continue to refuse them
such?" "Yea," answered Jupiter, "doubtless they sigh: yet not for my
sake but their own: not that each may praise God under his own vine and
fig-tree, but that they may enjoy the fruit thereof in peace and
delight. Of late I asked of a scurvy tailor, should I give him peace?
He gave me answer, 'twas the same to him, that must ply his needle as
well in peace as in war: and the like answer I got from a brazier,
which said if he could get no bells to found in peace time, yet in time
of war he had enough to do with cannon and mortars. So likewise, a
smith replied to me and said, 'Though I have no ploughs and hay-carts
to mend in war-time, yet have I so many war-horses and army waggons to
deal with that I can well afford to do without peace.' Lookye then,
dear Mercurius, why should I grant them peace? True there be some that
do desire it, yet only as I say, for their belly's sake and their
pleasure: contrariwise there be others that will still have war, not
because 'tis my will, but because 'tis for their profit. And just as
the masons and carpenters desire peace, to earn money by the building
again of ruined houses, so others that be not sure of earning a living
by their handicraft in time of peace do hope for the continuing of war,
wherein they can steal."</p>

<p>Now when I found my Jupiter so to go about with these matters, I could
well conceive that he, with so confused a mind, could give me little
account of mine own, and so I made not my business known to him, but
took the bull by the horns, and away by by-paths well known to me, to
Lippstadt, where I inquired for my father-in-law as I were a messenger
from foreign parts, and learned at once that he, with his wife, had
quitted this world six months before, and secondly, that my dear wife,
having been delivered of a man-child, that was now with her sister, had
in like manner straightway, after her lying-in, quitted this mortal
scene. Upon that I delivered to my brother-in-law the writings which I
had before addressed to my father-in-law, to my wife, and to him, my
wife's brother. Who would have entertained me himself, to learn from
me, as from a messenger, how it fared with Simplicissimus and of what
rank he was now. In the end mine own sister-in-law did at length
converse with me, I telling of myself all the good I knew; for my
pock-pitted face had so marred and changed me that no man could know me
more, save Herr von Schönstein: and he, as my true friend, did hold his
tongue. But I telling her at length how Herr Simplicissimus had many
fine horses and servants and rode abroad in a black-velvet coat all
trimmed with gold, "Yea," said she, "I did ever believe he was of no
such low descent as he gave himself out to be: the commandant of this
place did ever persuade my late parents, with great assurances, that
they had made a good match with him for my sister, which had ever been
a virtuous maiden: yet of all that I myself could never look for a good
ending. Nevertheless did he content himself and resolve to take upon
him either Swedish or Hessian service in the garrison here: and to that
end would he fetch hither his goods that he had left at Cologne: which
turned out ill, and he himself was by clean roguery spirited away into
France, leaving my sister, that had had him to husband but for four
weeks, yea, and a half-dozen of citizens' daughters likewise, with
child by him; all which one after another, and my sister last of all,
were brought to bed of boys. So since my father and mother were dead,
and I and my husband without hope of children, we did adopt my sister's
child to be the heir of all our property, and with the help of the
commandant here did get possession of his father's money at Cologne;
which same might be reckoned at three thousand gulden; and so the young
lad when he shall come of age shall have no cause to count himself
among the paupers. Yea, I and my husband do love the child so much that
we would not yield him up to his own father though he came in person to
fetch him away: moreover, he is the comeliest of all his half-brothers,
and so like to his father as he had been cut out on his very pattern:
and I know if my brother-in-law did but hear what a fair son he hath he
would not delay to come hither were it but to see the little
sweetheart."</p>

<p>The like talk my sister-in-law held, by which I might well perceive her
love to my child, which now ran about in his first breeches, and
rejoiced mine heart: and with that I brought out the trinkets that
Herzbruder had given me to present on his behalf to my wife: which,
said I, Master Simplicissimus had given me to deliver to his wife for a
salutation: who being dead, I accounted it fair to leave the same for
his child: all which my brother-in-law and his wife received with joy,
and were convinced thereby that I had no want of means, but must indeed
be a fellow of a different sort from that which they had fancied me to
be. So now I pressed for leave to be gone, and having obtained such, I
begged in the name of Simplicissimus to kiss Simplicissimus the
younger, that I might tell the same to his father for a token. And this
being done with the goodwill of my sister-in-law, my nose and the
child's began at once and together to bleed, till I thought my heart
would break: yet did I hide my feelings, and that none might have time
to mark the cause of this sympathy, I took myself off at once, and
after fourteen days of much trouble and danger came again to the spa in
beggar's garb: for on the way I had been plundered and stripped.</p>




		</section>
	</body>
</html>
