<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XV: On What Condition the Huntsman Was Set Free</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-3" id="chapter-3-15" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">On What Condition the Huntsman Was Set Free</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Meanwhile ’twas known at Soest how it had fared with the convoy, how I and the corporal had been captured and whither we had been taken; and therefore next day came a drummer to fetch us back: whereupon the corporal and the three others were delivered up, together with a letter to the following purport (for the commandant sent it to me to read):</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>“Monsieur, <abbr>etc.</abbr>⁠—By the bearer, your tambour, your message hath been delivered: and in answer thereto I restore herewith, in return for ransom received, the corporal and the three other prisoners: but as concerns Simplicissimus, called the Huntsman, the same cannot be allowed to return, as having once served on this side. But if I can serve your honour in any matters short of those touching my allegiance, you have in me a willing servant, and as such I remain,</p>
				<footer>
					<p>“<span epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your honour’s obedient servant,</span><br/>
					“<span epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">[Daniel] de S[aint] A[ndré]</span>.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-26" id="noteref-26" epub:type="noteref">26</a></p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Now this letter did not half please me, yet I must return thanks to him for suffering me to see it. But when I asked to speak with the commandant I received answer he would himself send for me as soon as he had despatched the drummer, which should be done next morning: till then I must be patient.</p>
			<p>So when I had waited the appointed time, the commandant sent for me, and that just at dinnertime, and then for the first time the honour fell to me of sitting at table with him. And so long as the meal lasted he drank to my health and said no word, great or small, of the business he had with me; nor was it my part to begin. But the meal now ended and I being somewhat fuddled, says he, “My friend the Huntsman, ye will have understood from my letter under what pretext I have kept ye here: and indeed I intend no wrong or anything contrary to reason and the usage of war, for yourself have confessed to me and the judge-advocate that you once served on our side in the main army, and therefore must resolve yourself to take service under my command. And in time, if ye behave yourself well, I will so advance you as ye could never have hoped for among the Imperials, otherwise ye must not take it ill if I send you to that lieutenant-colonel from whom the dragoons before captured you.” To which I answered, “Worshipful colonel” (for at that time ’twas not the usage that soldiers of fortune were entitled “your honour” even though they were colonels), “I hope, since I am bound by oath neither to the crown of Sweden nor its confederates, and still less to that lieutenant-colonel, that I am therefore not bound to take service with the Swedes and so to break the oath which I swore to the emperor, and therefore beg the worshipful colonel with all humility to be good enough to relieve me from such a proposal.” “How?” says the colonel, “do ye despise the Swedish service? I would have you to know ye are my prisoner, and sooner than let you go to Soest to do the enemy service I will bring you to another trial, or let you rot in prison.” And so, said he, I might lay my account.</p>
			<p>Truly at these words I was afeared, yet would not yet give in, but answered, God would protect me both from such despiteful treatment and from perjury: for the rest, I persisted in my humble hope that the colonel would, according to his known reputation, deal with me as with a soldier. “Yea,” said he, “I know well how I could treat ye if I would be strict; but be ye better advised, lest I find cause to show you other countenance.” And with that I was led back to the prison.</p>
			<p>And now can any man easily guess that I slept not much that night, but had all manner of thoughts: and next morning came certain officers with the cornet that had taken me, under colour of passing the time, but in truth to tell me that the colonel was minded to have me tried as a sorcerer if I would not otherwise be content. So would they have terrified me, and found out what my powers were: yet as I had the comfort of a good conscience, I took all coolly and said but little, as seeing well that the colonel cared for nothing but this: that he would fain have me no more at Soest. And well might he suppose that if he once let me go I should not leave that place, where I hoped for promotion, and moreover had two fine horses there and other things of price. Next day he had me brought to him again and asked, had I resolved otherwise. So I answered, “Colonel, to this I am determined, that I will sooner die than be perjured. Yet if the worshipful colonel will set me free and be pleased not to call upon me to do any warlike service, then will I promise him with heart, mouth, and hand to bear and use no arms against the Swedes and Hessians for the space of six months.”</p>
			<p>To that he agreed at once, gave me his hand upon it, and forgave me my ransom; further, he commanded his secretary to draw up an agreement to that effect in duplicate, which we both subscribed, wherein he promised me protection and all freedom so long as I should remain in the fortress entrusted to him. On the other hand, I bound myself to the two points above named, videlicet: that I, so long as I should sojourn in the said fortress, would neither undertake anything to the hurt of the garrison and its commander, nor would conceal aught that was intended to their prejudice and damage, but would much more further their profit and benefit, and prevent any damage to them to the best of my ability⁠—yea, that if the place were attacked I should and would help to defend it.</p>
			<p>Thereupon he kept me to dine with him again, and showed me more honour than I could in all my lifetime have looked for from the Imperials: and so by little and little he won me over, till I would not have returned to Soest even if he had let me go thither and had accounted me free from my promise.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
