<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-3" id="chapter-3-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:title">VI: HOW THE EMBASSY OF THE FLEAS FARED WITH JUPITER</h3>


<p class="continue">Now methought 'twas possible this fellow might be no such fool as he
pretended, but might be serving me as I had served others in Hanau to
escape from us the better: so I determined to put him in a passion, for
in such plight it is easiest to know a real madman; and says I, "The
reason I am come down from heaven is that I missed thee there, and so
took Daedalus's wings and flew down to earth to seek thee. But when I
came to ask for thee I found thee in all places but of ill repute; for
Zoilus and Momus have throughout the world so slandered thee and all
the other gods, and decried ye as wanton and stinking, that ye have
lost all credit with mankind. Thyself, say they, beest a lousy,
adulterous caperer after woman-kind; how canst thou then, punish the
world for such vices? Vulcan they say is but a poltroon that let pass
Mars's adultery without proper revenge; and how can that halting
cuckold forge any weapons of note? Venus, too, is for her unchastity
the most infamous baggage in the world: and how can she endow another
with grace and favour? Mars they say is but a murderer and a robber;
Apollo a shameless lecher; Mercury an idle chatterer, thief and pander;
Priapus filth; Hercules a brainsick ruffian; and, in a word, the whole
crew of the gods so ill famed that they should of right be lodged
nowhere but in Augeas's stable, which even without them stinks in the
nostrils of all the world."</p>

<p>"Aha;" says Jupiter, "and who would wonder if I laid aside my
graciousness and punished these wretched slanderers and blasphemous
liars with thunder and lightning? How thinkest thou, my true and
beloved Ganymede, shall I curse these chatterers with eternal thirst
like Tantalus, or hang them up with that loose talker Daphitas on Mount
Thorax, or grind them with Anaxarchus in a mortar, or set them in
Phalaris's red-hot bull of Agrigent? Nay, nay, Ganymede: all these
plagues and punishments together are too little: I will fill Pandora's
box anew and empty it upon the rogues' heads: then Nemesis shall wake
the furies and send them at their heels, and Hercules shall borrow
Cerberus from Pluto and hunt those wicked knaves with him like wolves,
and when I have in this wise chased and tormented them enough, then
will I bind them fast with Hesiod and Homer to a pillar in hell and
there have them chastised for ever without pity by the Furies."</p>

<p>Now while Jupiter thus spake he began to make a hunt for the fleas he
had upon him: for these, as one might perceive, did plague him sore.
And as he did so he cried, "Away with ye, ye little tormentors; I swear
to ye by Styx ye shall never have that, that ye so earnestly desire."
So I asked him what he meant by such words. He answered, the nation of
the fleas, as soon as they learned he was come on earth, had sent their
ambassadors to compliment him: and there had complained to him that,
though he had assigned to them the dogs' coats as a dwelling, yet on
account of certain properties common to women, some poor souls went
astray and trespassed on the ladies' furs; and such poor wandering
creatures were by the women evil entreated, caught, and not only
murdered, but first so miserably martyred and crushed between their
fingers that it might move the heart of a stone. "Yea," said Jupiter
further, "they did present their case to me so movingly and piteously
that I must needs have sympathy with them and so promised them help,
yet on condition I should first hear the women: to that they objected
that if 'twas allowed to the women to plead their cause and to oppose
them, they knew well they with their poisonous tongues would either
impose upon my goodness and loving-kindness, and outcry the fleas
themselves, or by their sweet words and their beauty would befool me
and lead me astray to a wrong judgment. But if I must allow the women
to hunt, catch, and with the hunters' privilege to slay them in their
preserves, then their petition was that they might in future be
executed in honourable wise, and either cut down with a pole-axe like
oxen or snared like game, and no longer to be so scandalously crushed
between the fingers and so broken on the wheel, by which means their
own limbs were made instruments of torture." "Gentlemen," said I, "ye
must be greatly tormented when they thus tyrannise over ye." "Yea,
truly," said they, "they be so envious of us. Is it right? Can they not
suffer us in their territories? for many of them so cleanse their
lap-dogs with brushes, combs, soap and lye, and other like things, that
we are compelled to leave our fatherland and to seek other dwellings."
Thereupon I allowed them to lodge with me and to make my person feel
their presence, their ways and works, that I might judge accordingly:
and then the rascally crew began so to plague me that, as ye have seen,
I must again be rid of them. I will give them a privilege, but only
this, that the women may squeeze them and crush them as much as they
will: and if I catch any so pestilent a customer I will deal with him
no better.</p>




		</section>
	</body>
</html>
