<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-2" id="chapter-2-16" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:title">XVI: HOW SIMPLICISSIMUS FOUND GOODLY SPOILS, AND HOW HE BECAME A THIEVISH BROTHER OF THE WOODS</h3>


<p class="continue">Yet to all appearance my condition grew worse and worse the further I
went; yea, so grievous that I conceived I was born but for misfortune:
for I was but a few miles distant from the Croats when I was caught by
highwaymen, which, without doubt, thought they had captured in me
somewhat of value, for by reason of the dark night they could not see
my fool's coat, and forthwith bade two of their number take me to their
trysting-place in the forest. So when they had brought me thither, and
'twas still pitch-dark, one fellow would at once have money from me: to
which end he laid aside his gauntlets and his fire-arms and began to
search me, asking, "Who art thou? Hast thou money?"</p>

<p>Yet so soon as he was ware of my hairy clothing and the long asses'
ears on my cap, which he took for horns, and at the same time perceived
the shining sparks which the hides of beasts do commonly shew when they
are stroked in the dark, he was so terrified that he shrank into
himself. That did I presently mark: so before he could recover himself
or devise aught, I stroked down my hide with both hands to such good
purpose that it glittered as if I had been stuffed full of burning
sulphur, and then I answered him in a terrible voice, "I am the devil,
and I will break thy neck and thy fellow's too."</p>

<p>Which so terrified both that they fled through the thicket as swiftly
as if the fires of hell were pursuing them; yea, though they dashed
themselves against sticks and stones and trunks of trees, and yet more
often tumbled, they were up again with all speed. So they went on till
I could hear them no longer; while I laughed so loud that it echoed
through the whole forest, which, without doubt, in that dark wilderness
was horrible to hear.</p>

<p>Now when I would be gone I tripped over the musket; and that I took
for myself, for already I had learned from the Croats how to manage
fire-arms: then as I walked on I came upon a knapsack which, like my
coat, was made of calf-skin: that too I took up, and found that a
cartridge-pouch, well stored with powder and shot and all appurtenance,
hung below it. All this I hung on me, took the musket on my shoulder
like a soldier, and hid myself not far off in a thicket, intending to
sleep there awhile; but at daybreak came the whole crew to the spot,
searching for the musket that was lost and the knapsack: so I pricked
up mine ears like a fox and kept still as a mouse; and when they found
nothing they mocked at those two that had fled before me. "Shame," said
they, "ye craven fools: shame on your very heart that ye could so
suffer yourselves to be frighted and chased, and have your arms taken
by a single man." Yet one fellow swore the devil should take him if
'twere not the devil himself: his horns and his hairy hide he had well
perceived; and the other waxed angry and said, "It may have been the
devil or his dam, if I had but my knapsack back again." Then one of
them whom I took to be their captain answered him; and says he, "What
thinkest thou the devil should do with thy knapsack and thy musket? I
would wager my neck the rascal that ye so shamefully let go hath taken
both with him." Yet another took the contrary part, and said it might
well happen that some countrymen had since passed that way who had
found the things and taken them: and in the end all approved this, and
'twas believed by all the band they had had the devil himself in their
hands, especially because the fellow that would search me in the
darkness not only swore the same with horrid oaths, but also was able
powerfully to describe and to magnify the rough and glittering skin and
the two horns as certain signs of the devil's quality. Nay, I do
conceive that had I shewn myself again unawares the whole band would
have run. So at last, when they had sought long enough and had found
nothing, they went on their way again: but I opened the knapsack to
make my breakfast thereof, and at the first trial I brought out a pouch
in which were some 360 ducats. And that I rejoiced thereat none need
question, yet may the reader be assured that the knapsack pleased me
yet more than this fine sum of money, since I found it well stored with
provisions. And as such yellow-boys are far too sparsely strewn among
common soldiers for them to take such with them on a raid, I judge that
the fellow must have just snapped up these on that very excursion, and
quickly whipped them into his knapsack that he might not be compelled
to share them with the rest.</p>

<p>Thereupon I made a cheerful breakfast, and found too a merry little
spring, at which I refreshed myself and counted my fine ducats. And if
my life depended thereon, to say, in what land or place I then found
myself, I could not tell. And first I stayed in the wood as long as my
food lasted, with which I dealt right sparingly: then when my knapsack
was empty, hunger drove me to the farmers' houses. And there I crept by
night into cellar and kitchen and took what food I found and could
carry off; and this I conveyed away to the wildest part of the wood.
And so I led a hermit's life as before, save that I stole much and
therefore prayed less, and had, moreover, no fixed abode, but wandered
now here, now there. 'Twas well for me indeed that it was now the
beginning of summer, though I could kindle a fire with my musket
whenever I would.</p>




		</section>
	</body>
</html>
