<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-1" id="chapter-1-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:title">VI: IS SO SHORT AND SO PRAYERFUL THAT SIMPLICISSIMUS THEREUPON SWOONS AWAY</h3>


<p class="continue">But hardly had I composed myself to sleep when I heard a voice that
cried aloud, "O wondrous love towards us thankless mortals! O mine only
comfort, my hope, my riches, my God!" and more of the same sort, all of
which I could not hear or understand. Yet these were surely words which
should rightly have cheered, comforted, and delighted every Christian
soul that should find itself in such a plight as did I. But O
simplicity! O ignorance! 'Twas all gibberish<a href="#div2Ref_01" id="div2_01" class="pginternal"><sup>[1]</sup></a> to me, and all in an
unknown tongue out of which I could make nothing: yea, was rather
terrified by its strangeness. Yet when I heard how the hunger and
thirst of him that spake should be satisfied, my unbearable hunger did
counsel me to join myself to him as a guest. So I plucked up heart to
come out of my hollow tree and to draw nigh to the voice I had heard,
where I was ware of a tall man with long greyish hair which fell in
confusion over his shoulders: a tangled beard he had shapen like to a
Swiss cheese; his face yellow and thin yet kindly enough, and his long
gown made up of more than a thousand pieces of cloth of all sorts sewn
together one upon another. Round his neck and body he had wound a heavy
iron chain like St. William,<a href="#div2Ref_02" id="div2_02" class="pginternal"><sup>[2]</sup></a> and in other ways seemed in mine eyes
so grisly and terrible that I began to shake like a wet dog. But what
made my fear greater was that he did hug to his breast a crucifix some
six spans long. So I could fancy nought else but that this old grey man
must be the Wolf of whom my dad had of late told me: and in my fear I
whipped out my bagpipe, which, as mine only treasure, I had saved from
the troopers, and blowing up the sack, tuned up and made a mighty noise
to drive away that same grisly wolf: at which sudden and unaccustomed
music in that lonely place the hermit was at first no little dismayed,
deeming, without doubt, 'twas a devil come to terrify him and so
disturb his prayers, as happened to the great St. Anthony. But
presently recovering himself, he mocked at me as his tempter in the
hollow tree, whither I had retired myself: nay, plucked up such heart
that he advanced upon me to defy the enemy of mankind.</p>

<p>"Aha!" says he, "thou art a proper fellow enough, to tempt saints
without God's leave": and more than that I heard not: for his approach
caused in me such fear and trembling that I lost my senses and fell
forthwith into a swoon.</p>




		</section>
	</body>
</html>
