<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-1" id="chapter-1-32" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:title">XXXII: HOW SIMPLICISSIMUS SPOILED THE DANCE</h3>


<p class="continue">Just as I was free of my basin my lord was going forth: so I followed
him to a great house, where in a room I saw gentlemen and ladies,
bachelors and maidens, twisting about so quickly that everything spun
round: with such stamping and noise that I deemed they were all gone
mad, for I could not imagine what they could intend with this rage and
fury: yea, the very sight of them was so terrible, so fearful, and so
dreadful that all my hair stood on end, and I could believe nothing but
that they were all bereft of reason. And as we came nearer I was aware
that these were our guests, which had up till noon been in their right
senses. "Good God," thought I, "what do these poor folk intend to do?
Surely madness is come upon them." Yet presently I thought these might
perchance be hellish spirits, which under this disguise did make a mock
of the whole human race by such wanton capers and monkey-tricks: for I
thought, had they human souls and God's image in them, sure they would
not act so unlike to men.</p>

<p>When my lord came in and would enter the room, the tumult ceased, save
that there was such bowing and ducking with the heads and such
curtseying and scraping with the feet on the floor that methought they
would scrape out the foot-tracks they had trodden in their furious
madness. And by the sweat that ran down their faces, and by their
puffing and blowing, I could perceive they had struggled hard: yet did
their cheerful countenances declare that such labours had not vexed
them. Now was I fain to know what this mad behaviour might mean, and
therefore asked of my comrade and trusted confidant what such lunatic
doings might signify, or for what purpose this furious ramping and
stamping was intended. And he, as the real truth, told me that all
there present had agreed to stamp down the floor of the room. "For
how," says he, "canst thou otherwise suppose that they would so stamp
about? Hast thou not seen how they broke all the windows for pastime?
Even so will they break in this floor." "Good heavens!" quoth I, "then
must we also fall, and in falling break our legs and our necks in their
company?" "Yea," quoth my comrade, "'tis their purpose, and therefore
do they work so devilishly hard. And thou wilt see that when they do
find themselves in danger of death each one seizes upon a fair lady or
maiden, for 'tis said that to couples that fall holding one another in
this way no grievous harm is wont to happen."</p>

<p>Now as I believed all this tale, there fell upon me such anguish and
fear of death that I knew not where I should stand, and when the
minstrels, which I had not before seen, made themselves likewise heard,
and every man ran to his lady as soldiers run to their guns or to their
ranks when they hear the drums beat the alarm, and each man took his
partner by the hand, 'twas to me even as if I saw the floor already
a-sinking, and my neck and those of many others a-breaking. But when
they began to jump so that the whole building shook (for they played
just then a lively galop), then thought I, "Now is thy life at stake."
For I thought nought else but that the whole building would suddenly
tumble in: so in my deadly fear I seized upon a lady of high nobility
and eminent virtues with whom my lord was even then conversing. Her I
caught all unawares by the arm, like a bear, and clung to her like a
burr, but when she struggled, as not knowing what foolish fancies were
in my head, I acted as one desperate, and for sheer despair began to
scream as if they would murder me. Now did the music cease of a sudden:
the dancers and their partners stopped dancing, and the honourable lady
to whose arm I still clung deemed herself grievously insulted; for she
fancied my lord had had all this done for her annoyance, who thereupon
commanded that I should be soundly whipped and then locked up
somewhere, "for," said he, "'twas not the first trick I had played on
him that day." Yet the grooms which were to carry out his orders had
sympathy with me, and spared me the whipping and locked me up in a
goose-pen under the staircase.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
