<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-2" id="chapter-2-9" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:title">IX: CROOKED PRAISE OF A PROPER LADY</h3>


<p class="continue">Now no sooner was I come into the house but I must forthwith to the
parlour, for there were noble ladies with my lord which desired much to
see and to hear his new fool. There I appeared and stood a-gaping like
a dummy: whereupon she whom I had before caught at the dance took
occasion to say she had been told this calf could speak, but now she
did plainly perceive 'twas not true. Whereto I made answer I had also
heard apes could not speak, but now could plainly hear 'twas not so.</p>

<p>"What;" says my lord, "opinest thou, then, that these ladies be apes?"</p>

<p>So I answered, "Be they not so already, yet they soon will be: for who
knoweth how things will go; Yea, I myself had never expected to become
a calf; and yet am I that same."</p>

<p>Then my lord would ask me whereby I could tell that these ladies should
become apes: so I answered him, "Our ape here carrieth his hinder parts
naked, but these ladies do so carry their bosom: which other maidens be
wont to cover."</p>

<p>"Ah, rogue," saith my lord, "thou beest but a foolish calf, and as thou
art so thou talkest: for these ladies do of purpose shew what 'tis
worth men's while to gaze upon; whereas the poor ape goeth naked for
sheer want of clothing. And now be thou quick to make good that wherein
thou hast offended: else will we so bastinado thee and so hunt thee to
thy goose-pen with dogs as men use to do with calves that know not how
to behave themselves. Yet let us hear if thou canst praise a lady as is
becoming."</p>

<p>So I looked upon the lady from head to foot and again from foot to
head, and gazed upon her so fixedly and so lovingly as I would take her
to wife: and at last, "Sir," said I, "I see clearly where the fault
lieth; for the rascal tailor is the cause of all. The villain hath left
those parts, which should cover the neck and the breast, below in the
skirts: and therefore do these so trail behind. The botcher should have
his hand hewn off that can tailor no better than this." And "Lady,"
quoth I to her, "be rid of him, or he will shame you; and have a care
that you do deal with my dad's tailor, which same was hight Master
Powle: for he could fashion fine plaited gowns for my mammy, our Ann,
and our Ursula, and all cut even round about below. So did they never
drag in the mud like yours: nay, and ye cannot believe what fine
clothes he would make for the hussies."</p>

<p>So says my lord, "Were now thy father's Ann and thy father's Ursula
handsomer than these ladies;"</p>

<p>"Nay," said I, "my lord, that may not be: this young maiden hath hair
as yellow as sulphur, and the parting of her hair so white and smooth
as though one had cut bristle-brushes therefrom; yea, and her hair so
sweetly done up in rolls that it is like unto pipe-stems; yea, and as
if one had hanged upon each side of her head a pound of candles or a
dozen of sausages. Look you now, what a smooth, fair brow she hath! is
it not rounder than a plum-pudding and whiter than a dead man's skull
that has hung long on the gallows in wind and rain. 'Tis pity indeed
that her tender skin is so stained by puff-powder; for when people see
this who understand not such things, surely they will think this lady
had the king's evil, which is wont to produce such a scaly humour; and
this were surely pity: for look upon those sparkling eyes: they shine
as black as did the soot on my dad's chimney; for that did use to shine
so terribly when our Ann stood there before it with a wisp of straw to
warm the room as if fire were therein enough to set the world in a
blaze. Her cheeks be rosy enough, yet not so red as the red garters
with which the Swabian waggoners at Ulm did truss up their breeches.
Yet the bright red which she hath on her lips doth far surpass the
colour of those garters, and if she speak or laugh (I pray my masters
give heed thereto), then can one see in her mouth two rows of teeth, so
orderly and so sugary as if they were with one snip cut out of a white
turnip. Oh, lovely creature! I cannot believe that any one should feel
pain if thou shouldst bite him therewith! So, too, her neck is as white
as curdled milk and her bosom, which lieth beneath, of like colour. And
oh, my masters, look upon her hands and fingers: they be so slender, so
long, so slim, so supple, and so cunning as for all the world like a
gipsy's fingers, ready to thrust into any man's pockets and there go
a-fishing."</p>

<p>With that there arose such a laughter that none could hear me, nor I
talk: so I took French leave and off I went: for I would be mocked by
others so long as I would, and no longer.</p>




		</section>
	</body>
</html>
