<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-3" id="chapter-3-16" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:title">XVI: HOW SIMPLICISSIMUS BECAME A NOBLEMAN</h3>


<p class="continue">When a thing is to be, all things shape themselves to that end. Now did
I conceive that fortune had taken me to husband, or at least bound
herself so close to me that the most contrary happenings must turn out
to my profit: as when I learned at the commandant's table that my
servant with my two fine horses had come from Soest. But I knew not
(what at last I found) that tricky Fortune hath the sirens' art, who do
shew themselves kindest to those to whom they wish most harm, and so
doth raise a man the higher but for this end: to cast him down the
deeper. Now this servant, which I had before captured from the Swedes,
was beyond measure true to me, who had done him great kindnesses. He
therefore had saddled my two horses and rode out a good way from Soest
to meet the drummer that should bring me back, that not only I might
not have to walk so far, but also that I might not have to return to
Soest naked or in rags: for he conceived I had been stripped. So when
he met the drummer and the rest of the prisoners there he had my best
clothing in a pack. But when he saw me not, but understood I was kept
back to take service with the adversary, he set spurs to his horse and
says he, "Adieu, tambours, and you too. Corporal: where my master is
there will I be also," so he escaped and came to me at the very time
when the commandant had set me free and was shewing me such great
honour: who thereupon bestowed my horses in an inn till I could find
for myself a lodging to my liking, and called me fortunate by reason of
my servant's faith, yet wondered that I, as a common dragoon, and so
young to boot, should possess such fine horses and be so well equipped;
nay, when I had taken leave and would go to my inn he praised one horse
so loudly that I marked well he would fain have bought him from me. Yet
because from modesty he ventured not to make a bid, I said if I might
beg for the honour of his keeping the horse it was at his service. But
he refused roundly, more because I was fairly tipsy, and he would not
have the reproach of talking a present out of a drunken man, who might
thereafter repent of it, than because he would not fain have had that
noble horse.</p>

<p>That night I did consider how I would order my life in time to come;
and did decide to remain for the six months even where I was, and so in
peace to spend the winter which was now at hand, for which I knew I had
money enough for my purposes, without breaking into my treasure at
Cologne. "In so long a time," thought I, "thou wilt be full grown and
come to thy full strength, and so canst thou next spring take the field
with more boldness among the emperor's troops."</p>

<p>Early next morning I reviewed my saddle, which was far better lined
than the one I had presented to the cornet: and later on I had my horse
led to the colonel's quarters and told him: as I had determined to
spend the six months in which 'twas forbidden me to fight, peaceably
and under the colonel's protection, here, my horses were of no use to
me, which yet 'twere pity should be spoiled, and therefore begged him
that he would consent to grant this charger here present a place among
his own horses, and accept the same from me as a mark of grateful
acknowledgment of favours received, and that without scruple. The
colonel returned me thanks with great civility and very courteous
offers of service, and the same afternoon sent me by his steward one
fat ox alive, two fat pigs, a hogshead of wine, two hogsheads of beer,
twelve cords of firewood; all which he caused to be brought to me in
front of my new lodging, which I had even now hired for half a year,
and sent a message: that as he saw I was to live with him, and could
easily conceive that I was at first ill-provided with victual, he had
therefore sent me for household use a draught of wine and a joint of
meat, together with the fuel to cook the same: with this in addition,
that whereinsoever he could help me he would not fail. For which I
returned thanks as civilly as I could: presented the steward with two
ducats, and begged him to commend me to his master.</p>

<p>So when I saw I had gained such credit with the colonel for my
liberality, I thought to earn praise also among the common folk, that
none should take me for a mere malingerer: to that end I had my servant
called before me in presence of my landlord, and "Friend Nicolas," said
I, "thou hast shewn me more faithfulness than any master can expect
from his servant; but now, when I know not how to make it up to thee,
as having no master and no leave to fight, wherefrom I might gain booty
enough to reward thee as I would fain do, and in respect also of the
peaceful life which I do intend henceforth to live, and therefore do
need no servitor, I herewith give thee as thy pay the other horse, with
saddle, harness and pistols, with the request that thou wouldst be
content for the present to seek another master. And if I hereafter can
serve thee in any way, do thou not fail to ask me." With that he kissed
my hands and for tears could not speak, but would by no means have the
horse, but held it better I should turn it into money to use for my
maintenance. Yet at last I persuaded him to take it, after I had
promised to take him again into my service so soon as I should need a
man. At this parting my landlord was so moved that his eyes also filled
with tears: and as my servant exalted me among the soldiers for this
action, so did my landlord among the citizens.</p>

<p>As to the commandant, he held me for so determined a fellow that he
would have ventured to build upon my word, since I did not only truly
keep the oath I had sworn to the emperor, but in order to keep that
other promise, which I had made to himself, with great strictness had
rid myself of my fine horses, my arms, and my most faithful servant.</p>




		</section>
	</body>
</html>
