<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXIX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-2" id="chapter-2-29" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:title">XXIX: HOW A NOTABLY PIOUS SOLDIER FARED IN PARADISE, AND HOW THE HUNTSMAN FILLED HIS PLACE</h3>


<p class="continue">Now unless our hostess had been content to have herself and her whole
house possessed by my army, 'twas certain she must be rid of them. And
that she did, short and sharp, for she put my rags into the oven and
burned them out as clean as an old tobacco-pipe, so that I lived again
as 'twere in a rose-garden freed from my vermin: yea, and none can
believe how good it was for me to be free from that torment wherein I
had sat for months as in an ant's nest. But in recompense for that I
had a new plague to encounter: namely, that my new master was one of
those strange soldiers that do think to get to heaven: he was contented
with his pay and never harmed a child. His whole fortune consisted in
what he could earn by standing sentry and what he could save from his
weekly pay; and that, poor as it was, he valued above all the pearls of
the Orient: each sixpence he got he sewed into his breeches, and that
he might have more of such sixpences I and his horse must starve: I
must break my teeth upon dry Pumpernickel, and nourish myself with
water, or at best with small beer, and that was a poor affair for
me--inasmuch as my throat was raw from the dry black bread and my whole
body wasted away. If I would eat I must needs steal, and even that with
such secrecy that my master could by no manner of means be brought to
book. As for him, gallows and torture, headsmen and their helpers--yea,
and surgeons too--were but superfluous. Sutlers and hawkers too must
soon have beat a retreat from him: for his thoughts were far from
eating and drinking, gaming and quarrelling: but when he was ordered
out for a convoy or an expedition of any sort where pay was, there he
would loiter and dawdle away his time. Yea, I believe truly if this
good old dragoon had not possessed these soldierly virtues of
loitering, he would never have got me: for in that case he would have
followed my lieutenant-colonel at the double. I could count on no cast
clothes from him: for he himself went in such rags as did beforetime my
hermit in the woods. His whole harness and saddle were scarce worth
three-halfpence, and his horse so staggering for hunger that neither
Swede nor Hessian needed to fear his attack.</p>

<p>All these fair qualities did move his captain to send him to
Paradise--which was a monastery so called--on protection-duty: not
indeed as if he were of much avail for that purpose, but that he might
grow fat and buy himself a new nag: and most of all because the nuns
had asked for a pious and conscientious and peaceable fellow for their
guard. And so he rode thither and I behind him: for he had but one
horse: and "Zounds;" says he, "Simbrecht; (for he could never frame to
pronounce my name aright) when we come to Paradise we will take our
fill." And I answered him: "Yes," said I, "the name is a good omen: God
grant it that the place be like its name!" "Yes, yes," says he, for he
understood me not, "if we can get two ohms of the good Westphalian beer
every day we shall not fare ill. Look to thyself: for I will now have a
fine new cloak made, and thou canst have the old one: 'twill make a
brave new coat for thee."</p>

<p>Well might he call it the old one: for I believe it could well remember
the Battle of Pavia,<a href="#div2Ref_19" id="div2_19" class="pginternal"><sup>[19]</sup></a> so weatherbeaten and shabby was it: and with
the giving of it he did me but little kindness.</p>

<p>Paradise we found as we would have it and still better: in place of
angels we found fair maidens, who so entertained us with food and drink
that presently I came again to my former fatness: the strongest beer we
had, the best Westphalian hams and smoked sausages and savoury and
delicate meat, boiled in salt water and eaten cold. There too I learned
to spread black bread a finger thick with salt butter, and put cheese
on that so that it might slip down better: and when I could have a
knuckle of mutton garnished with garlic and a good tankard of beer
beside it, then would I refresh body and soul and forget all my past
sufferings. In a word, this Paradise pleased me as much as if it had
been the true Paradise: no other care had I except that I knew 'twould
not always last, and I must fare forth again in my rags.</p>

<p>But even as misfortune ever came to me in abundance when it once began
to pursue me, so now it seemed to me that good fortune would run it
hard: for when my master would send me to Soest to fetch his baggage
thence, I found on the road a pack, and in the same some ells of
scarlet cloth cut for a cloak, and red silk also for the lining. That I
took with me, and at Soest I exchanged it with a clothier for common
green woollen cloth fit for a coat and trappings, with the condition he
should make such a coat and provide me also with a new hat: and
inasmuch as I grievously needed also a new pair of shoes and a shirt, I
gave the huckster the silver buttons and the lace that belonged to the
cloak, for which he procured for me all that I wanted, and turned me
out brand-new. So I returned to Paradise to my master, who was mightily
incensed that I had not brought my findings to him: yea, he talked of
trouncings, and for a trifle, an he had not been shamed and had the
coat fitted him, would have stript it off me for to wear it himself.
But to my thinking I had done a good piece of trading.</p>

<p>But now must the miserly fellow be ashamed that his lad went better
clothed than he: therefore he rides to Soest, borrows money from his
captain and equips himself in the finest style, with the promise to
repay all out of his weekly protection-pay: and that he carefully did.
He had indeed himself means to pay that and more also, but was too sly
to touch his stores: for had he done that his malingering was at an
end, wherein he hoped to abide softly that winter through, and some
other naked fellow had been put in his place: but now the captain must
perforce leave him where he lay, or he would not recover his money he
had lent. Thenceforward we lived the laziest life in the world, wherein
skittles was our chief exercise: when I had groomed my dragoon's horse,
fed and given him to drink, then I played the gentleman and went
a-walking.</p>

<p>The convent was safeguarded also by our opponents the Hessians with a
musqueteer from Lippstadt: the same was by trade a furrier, and for
that reason not only a master-singer but also a first-rate fencer, and
lest he should forget his art he daily exercised himself with me in all
weapons, in which I became so expert that I was not afraid to challenge
him whenever he would. My old dragoon, in place of fencing with him,
would play at skittles, and that for no other wager but who should
drink most beer at dinner: and so whoever lost the convent paid.</p>

<p>This convent had its own game-preserves and therefore its own huntsman,
and inasmuch as I also was clad in green I joined myself to him, and
from him in that autumn and winter I learned all his arts, and
especially all that concerns catching of small game. For that cause,
and because also the name Simplicissimus was somewhat uncommon and for
the common folk easily forgotten or hard to pronounce, every one called
me the "little huntsman": and meanwhile I learned to know every way and
path, and that knowledge I made good use of thereafter. But when by
reason of ill weather I could not take my walks abroad in the wood,
then I read all manner of books which the bailiff of the convent lent
me. And so soon as the good nuns knew that, besides my good voice, I
could also play a little on the lute and the harpsichord, then did they
give more heed to me, and because there was added to these qualities a
prettily proportioned body and a handsome face enough, therefore they
deemed all my manners and customs, my doings and my ways, to be the
ways of nobility: and so became I all unexpectedly a much-loved
gentleman, of whom one could but wonder that he should serve so scurvy
a dragoon.</p>

<p>But when I had spent the winter in the midst of such pleasures, my
master was discharged: which vexed him so much (by reason of the good
living he was to lose) that he fell sick, and inasmuch as that was
aggravated by a violent fever (and likewise the old wounds that he had
got in the wars in his lifetime helped the mischief), he had but short
shrift, for in three weeks I had somewhat to bury, but this epitaph I
wrote for him:</p>
<div class="poem">
<p class="t0" style="margin-left:2em; text-indent:-2em">
"Old Miserly lies here, a soldier brave and good,</p>
<p class="t0" style="margin-left:2em; text-indent:-2em">Who all his lifetime through shed ne'er a drop of blood."</p>
</div>

<p>By right and custom the captain could take and inherit the man's horse
and musquet and the general all else that he left: but since I was a
lively, well-set-up lad, and gave hopes that in time I should not fear
any man, it was offered me to take all, if only I would take the place
of my dead master. And that I undertook the more readily because I knew
my master had left a pretty number of ducats sewn into his old
breeches, which he had raked together in his lifetime: and when in the
process of things I must give in my name--namely, Simplicius
Simplicissimus--and the muster-clerk (which was named Cyriack) could
not write it down aright, says he, "There is no devil in hell with such
a name." Thereon I asked him quickly, "Was there one there named
Cyriack?" and clever as he thought himself, that he would not answer:
and that pleased my captain so that from thenceforward he thought well
of me.</p>




		</section>
	</body>
</html>
