<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXVII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-2" id="chapter-2-27" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:title">XXVII: HOW THE PROVOST FARED IN THE BATTLE OF WITTSTOCK</h3>


<p class="continue">The same evening, and when we had hardly as yet pitched our tents, I
was brought to the Judge-Advocate-General, who had before him my
deposition and also writing materials; and he began to examine me more
closely. But I, on the other part, told my story even as it had
happened to me, yet was not believed, nor could the judge be sure
whether he had a fool or a hard-bitten knave before him, so pat did
question and answer fall and so strange was the whole history. He bade
me take a pen and write, to see what I could do, and moreover to see if
my handwriting was known, or if it had any marks in it that a man
could recognise. I took pen and paper as handily as one that had been
daily used to employ the same, and asked what I should write. The
Judge-Advocate-General, who was perhaps vexed because my examination
had prolonged itself far into the night, answered me thus: "What!" says
he, "write down 'Thy mother the whore.'"</p>

<p>Those words I did write down, and when they were read out they did but
make my case worse,<a href="#div2Ref_17" id="div2_17" class="pginternal"><sup>[17]</sup></a> for the Advocate-General said he was now well
assured that I was a rogue. Then he asked the provost, had they
searched me and found any writings upon me? The provost answered him
no; for how could they search a man that had been brought to them
naked? But it availed nought! The provost must search me in the
presence of all, and as he did that diligently (O ill-luck!) there he
found my two asses' ears with the ducats in them bound round my arms.
Then said they: "What need we any further witness? This traitor hath
without doubt undertaken some great plot, for why else should any
honest man disguise himself in a fool's raiment, or a man conceal
himself in women's garments? And how could any suppose that a man would
carry on him so great a quantity of money, unless it were that he
intended to do some great deed therewith?" For said they, did he not
himself confess he had learned lute-playing under the cunningest
soldier in the world, the commandant of Hanau? "Gentlemen," says they,
"what think you he did not learn among those sharp-witted Hessians? The
shortest way is to have him to the torture and then to the stake:
seeing he hath in any case been in the company of sorcerers and
therefore deserveth no better."</p>

<p>How I felt at that time any man can judge for himself; for I knew I was
innocent and had strong trust in God: yet I could see my danger and
lamented the loss of my fair ducats, which the Judge-Advocate-General
had put in his own pocket. But before they could proceed to extremities
with me Banér's folk fell upon ours: at the first the two armies fought
for the best position, and then secondly for the heavy artillery, which
our people lost forthwith. Our provost kept pretty far behind the line
of battle with his helpers and his prisoners, yet were we so close to
our brigade that we could tell each man by his clothing from behind;
and when a Swedish squadron attacked ours we were in danger of our
lives as much as the fighters, for in a moment the air was so full of
singing bullets that it seemed a volley had been fired in our honour.
At that the timid ducked their heads, as they would have crept into
themselves: but they that had courage and had been present at such
sport before let the balls pass over their heads quite unconcerned. In
the fighting itself every man sought to prevent his own death with the
cutting down of the nearest that encountered him: and the terrible
noise of the guns, the rattle of the harness, the crash of the pikes,
and the cries both of the wounded and the attackers made up, together
with the trumpets, drums and fifes, a horrible music. There could one
see nought but thick smoke and dust, which seemed as it would conceal
the fearful sight of the wounded and dead: in the midst of it could be
heard the pitiful outcries of the dying and the cheers of them that
were yet full of spirit: the very horses seemed as if they were more
and more vigorous to defend their masters, so furious did they shew
themselves in the performance of that duty which they were compelled to
do. Some of them one could see falling dead under their masters, full
of wounds which they had undeservedly received for the reward of their
faithful services: others for the same cause fell upon their riders,
and thus in their death had the honour of being borne by those they had
in life been forced to bear: others, again, being rid of the valiant
burden that had guided them, fled from mankind in their fury and
madness, and sought again their first freedom in the open field. The
earth, whose custom it is to cover the dead was there itself covered
with them, and those variously distinguished: for here lay heads that
had lost their natural owners, and there bodies that lacked their
heads: some had their bowels hanging out in most ghastly and pitiful
fashion, and others had their heads cleft and their brains scattered:
there one could see how lifeless bodies were deprived of their blood
while the living were covered with the blood of others; here lay arms
shot off, on which the fingers still moved, as if they would yet be
fighting; and elsewhere rascals were in full flight that had shed no
drop of blood: there lay severed legs, which though delivered from the
burden of the body, yet were far heavier than they had been before:
there could one see crippled soldiers begging for death, and on the
contrary others beseeching quarter and the sparing of their lives. In a
word, 'twas naught but a miserable and pitiful sight. The Swedish
conquerors drove our people from their position, which they had
defended with such ill luck, and were scattered everywhere in pursuit.
At which turn of things my provost, with us his prisoners, also took to
flight, though we had deserved no enmity from the conquerors by reason
of our resistance: but while the provost was threatening of us with
death and so compelling us to go with him, young Herzbruder galloped up
with five other horsemen and saluted him with a pistol and, "Lookye,
old dog," says he, "is it the time now to breed young puppies? Now will
I pay thee for thy pains."</p>

<p>But the shot harmed the provost as little as if it had struck an anvil.
So "Beest thou of that kidney," said Herzbruder, "yet I will not have
come to do thee a courtesy in vain: die thou must even if thy soul were
grown into thy body." And with that he compelled a musqueteer of the
provost's own guard, if he would himself have quarter, to cut him down
with an axe. And so that provost got his reward: but I being known by
Herzbruder, he bade them free me from my fetters and bonds, set me on a
horse, and charged his servant to bring me to a place of safety.</p>




		</section>
	</body>
</html>
