<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-4" id="chapter-4-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:title">XII: OF A DESPERATE FIGHT FOR LIFE IN WHICH EACH PARTY DOTH YET ESCAPE DEATH</h3>


<p class="continue">Now could I well understand I was born but for misfortune, for some
weeks before the engagement happened I heard some lower officers of
Götz's army that talked of our war: and says one, "Without a battle
will this summer not pass: and if we win, in the next winter we shall
surely take Freiburg and the Forest-towns: but if we earn a defeat we
shall earn winter quarters too." Upon this prophecy I laid my plans and
said to myself, "Now rejoice thee, Simplicissimus, for next spring thou
wilt drink good wine of the Lake and the Neckar and wilt enjoy all that
the troops of Weimar can win." Yet therein I was mightily deceived, for
being now of those troops myself, I was predestinated to help lay siege
to Breisach, for that siege was fully set afoot presently after the
Battle of Wittenweier, and there must I, like other musqueteers, watch
and dig trenches day and night, and gained naught thereby save that I
learnt how to assail a fortress by approaches, to which matter I had
paid but scant attention in the camp before Magdeburg. For the rest, I
was but lousily provided for, for two or three must lodge together, our
purses were empty, and so were wine, beer, and meat a rarity. Apples,
with half as much bread as I could eat, were my finest dainties. And
'twas hard for me to bear this when I reflected on the fleshpots of
Egypt, that is, on the Westphalian hams and sausages of Lippstadt. Yet
did I think but little on my wife, and when I did so I did but plague
myself with the thought that she might be untrue to me. At last was I
so impatient that I declared to my captain how my affairs stood and
wrote by the post to Lippstadt, and so heard from Colonel Saint André
and my father-in-law that they had, by letters to the Duke of Weimar,
secured that my captain should let me go with a pass.</p>

<p>So about a week or four days before Christmas I marched away with a
good musquet on my shoulder from the camp down through the Breisgau,
being minded at this same Christmas-tide to receive at Strassburg
twenty thalers sent to me by my brother-in-law, and then to betake
myself down the Rhine with the traders, since now there were no
Emperor's garrisons on the road. But when I was now past Endingen and
came to a lonely house, a shot was fired at me so close that the ball
grazed the rim of my hat, and forthwith there sprang out upon me a
strong, broad-shouldered fellow, crying to me to lay down my gun. So I
answered, "By God, my friend, not to please thee," and therewith cocked
my piece. Thereupon he whipped out a monstrous thing that was more like
to a headsman's sword than a rapier, and rushed upon me: and now that I
saw his true intent I pulled the trigger and hit him so fair on the
forehead that he reeled, and at last fell. So to take my advantage of
this I quickly wrested his sword out of his hand and would have run him
through with it, but it would not pierce him; and then suddenly he
sprang to his feet and seized me by the hair and I him, but his sword I
had thrown away. So upon that we began such a serious game together as
plainly shewed the bitter rage of each against the other, and yet could
neither be the other's master: now was I on top, and now he, and for a
moment both on our feet, which lasted not long, for each would have the
other's life. But as the blood gushed out in streams from my nose and
mouth I spat it into mine enemy's face, since he so greatly desired it:
and that served me well, for it hindered him from seeing. And so we
hauled each other about in the snow for more than an hour, till we were
so weary that to all appearance the weakness of one could not, with
fists alone, have overcome the weariness of the other; nor could either
have compassed the death of the other of his own strength and without
weapon. Yet the art of wrestling, wherein I had often exercised myself
at Lippstadt, now served me well, or I had doubtless paid the penalty:
for my enemy was stronger than I, and moreover proof against steel. So
when we had wearied us wellnigh to death says he at last, "Brother,
hold, I cry you mercy."</p>

<p>So says I, "Nay, thou hadst best have let me pass at the first." "And
what profit hast thou if I die?" quoth he. "Yea," said I, "and what
profit hadst thou had if thou hadst shot me dead, seeing that I have
not a penny in my pocket?" On that he begged my pardon, and I granted
it, and suffered him to stand up after he had sworn to me solemnly that
he would not only keep the peace but would be my faithful friend and
servant. Yet had I neither believed nor trusted him had I then known of
the villainies he had already wrought. But when we were on our feet we
shook hands upon this, that what had happened should be forgotten, and
each wondered that he had found his master in the other; for he
supposed that I was clad in the same rogue's hide as himself: and that
I suffered him to believe, lest when he had gotten his gun again he
should once more attack me. He had from my bullet a great bruise on his
forehead, and I too had lost much blood. Yet both were sorest about our
necks, which were so twisted that neither could hold his head upright.</p>

<p>But as it drew towards evening, and my adversary told me that till I
came to the Kinzig I should meet neither dog nor cat, still less a man,
whereas he had in a lonely hut not far from the road a good piece of
meat and a draught of the best, I let myself be persuaded and went with
him, he protesting with sighs all the way how it grieved him to have
done me a hurt.</p>




		</section>
	</body>
</html>
