<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-1" id="chapter-1-22" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:title">XXIII: WHO THE HERMIT WAS BY WHOM SIMPLICISSIMUS WAS CHERISHED</h3>


<p class="continue">The same morning the Governor's chamberlain commanded me, I should go
to the before-mentioned pastor, and there learn what his lordship had
said to him in my affair. Likewise he sent an orderly to bring me to
him. Then the pastor took me into his library, and there he sat down
and bade me also sit down, and says he, "My good Simplicissimus, that
same hermit with whom thou didst dwell in the wood was not only the
Lord Governor's brother-in-law, but also his staunch supporter in war
and his chiefest friend. As it pleased the Governor to tell me, the
same from his youth up had never failed either in the bravery of an
heroical soldier nor in that godliness and piety which became the
holiest of men: which two virtues it is not usual to find united. Yet
his spiritual mind, coupled with adverse circumstances, so checked the
course of his earthly happiness that he rejected his nobility and
resigned certain fine estates in Scotland where he was born, and
despised such because all worldly affairs now seemed to him vain,
foolish, and contemptible. In a word, he hoped to exchange his earthly
eminence for a better glory to come, for his noble spirit had a disgust
at all temporal display, and all his thoughts and desires were set on
that poor miserable life wherein thou didst find him in the forest and
wherein thou didst bear him company till his death." "And in my
opinion," said the pastor, "he had been seduced thereto by his reading
of many popish books concerning the lives of the ancient eremites. Yet
will I not conceal from thee how he came into the Spessart, and, in
accord with his wish, into such a miserable hermit's life, that thou
mayest hereafter be able to tell others thereof: for the second night
after that bloody battle of Höchst was lost, he came alone and
unattended to my parsonage-house, even as I, my wife, and children were
fallen asleep, and that towards morning, for because of the noise all
over the country which both pursuers and pursued are wont to make in
such cases, we had been awake all the night before and half of this
present one. At first he knocked gently, and then sharply enough, till
he wakened me and my sleep-drunken folk: and when I at his request, and
after short exchange of words, which was on both sides full cautious,
had opened the door, I saw the cavalier dismount from his mettlesome
steed. His costly clothing was as thickly sprinkled with the blood of
his enemies as it was decked with gold and silver; and inasmuch as he
still held his drawn sword in his hand, fear and terror came upon me.
Yet when he sheathed his sword and shewed nothing but courtesy I must
wonder that so noble a gentleman should so humbly beg a poor village
pastor for shelter. And by reason of his handsome person and his noble
carriage I addressed myself to him as to the Count of Mansfield
himself: but said he, he could for this once be not only compared to
the Count of Mansfield in respect of ill fortune but even preferred
before him. Three things did he lament: first, the loss of his lady,
and her near her delivery, and then the loss of his battle; and last of
all, that he had not had the luck to die therein, as did other honest
soldiers, for the Evangelical cause. Then would I comfort him, but saw
that his noble heart needed no comfort: so I set before him what the
house afforded and bade them make for him a soldier's bed of clean
straw, for in no other would he lie though much he needed rest. The
next morning, the first thing he did was to give me his horse and his
money (of which he had with him no mean sum in gold), and did share
divers costly rings among my wife, children, and servants. This could I
not understand in him, seeing that soldiers be wont far rather to take
than to give: and therefore I had doubts whether to receive so great
presents, and gave as a pretext that I had not deserved so much from
him nor could again repay him: besides, said I, if folk saw such
riches, and specially the splendid horse, which could not be hid, in my
possession, many would conclude I had robbed or murdered him. But he
said I should live without care on that score, for he would protect me
from such danger with his own handwriting, yea, and he would desire to
carry away out of my parsonage not even his shirt, let alone his
clothes: and therewith he opened his design to become a hermit. I
fought against that with might and main, for methought such a plan
smacked of Popery, reminding him that he could serve the Gospel more
with his sword, but in vain: for he argued so long and stoutly with me
that at last I gave in and provided him with those books, pictures, and
furniture which thou didst find in his hut. Yet would he take nothing
in return for all that he had presented to me save only the coverlet of
wool, under which he had slept on the straw that night: and out of that
he had a coat made. And my wagon chains (those which he always wore)
must I exchange with him for a golden one whereon he wore his lady's
portrait, so that he kept for himself neither money nor money's worth.
Then my servant led him to the wildest part of the wood, and there
helped him to build his hut. And in what manner he there spent his
life, and with what help at times I did assist him, thou knowest as
well as I, yea, in part better.</p>

<p>"Now when lately the Battle of Nördlingen was lost and I, as thou
knowest, was clean stripped of all and also evilly handled, I fled
hither for safety; besides, I had here my chief possessions. And when
my ready money was about to fail me, I took three rings and the
before-mentioned chain, together with the portrait that I had from the
hermit, among which was his signet-ring, and took them to a Jew, to
turn them into money. But he, on account of their value and fine
workmanship, took them to the Governor to sell, who forthwith knew the
arms and portrait, and sent for me and asked where I had gotten such
treasures. So I told him the truth and shewed him the hermit's
handwriting or deed of gift, and narrated to him all his story; also
how he had lived and died in the wood. Such a tale he could not
believe, but put me under arrest, till he could better learn the truth;
and while he was at work sending out a party to take a survey of the
dwelling and to fetch thee hither, here I beheld thee brought to the
tower. Now seeing that the Governor hath no longer cause to doubt of my
story, and seeing that I can call to witness the place where the hermit
dwelt, and likewise thee and other living deponents, and most of all my
sexton, which so often admitted thee and him to the church before day,
and specially since the letter which he found in thy book of prayer
doth afford an excellent testimony not only of the truth, but of the
late hermit's holiness: therefore he will shew favour to me and thee
for the sake of his dear departed brother-in-law. And now hast thou
only to decide what thou wouldest he should do for thee. An thou wilt
study, he pays the cost: desirest thou to learn a trade, he will have
thee taught one: but if thou wilt stay with him he will hold thee as
his own child: for he said if even a dog came to him from his departed
brother-in-law he would cherish it." So I answered, 'twas all one to me
what the Lord Governor would do with me.</p>




		</section>
	</body>
</html>
