<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-5" id="chapter-5-22" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:title">XXII: BY WHAT A SHORT AND MERRY ROAD HE CAME HOME TO HIS DAD</h3>


<p class="continue">Now as long as my wound was a-healing 'tis true I was treated like a
prince; for I walked abroad at all times clad in a furred gown of cloth
of gold lined with sables, though the wound was neither mortal nor
dangerous, and in all the days of my life I have never tasted such rich
foods as then; but this was all the reward I had for my labours, save
the praise which the Czar favoured me with, and this too was spoiled
for me by the envy of certain nobles. So now, being completely sound
again, was I sent down the Volga in a ship to Astrachan, to set up a
powder-mill there as in Moscow, for 'twas not possible for the Czar to
furnish these frontier fortresses from Moscow with fresh and good
powder, which must needs be carried by water and that with great risk.
And this service I willingly undertook, for I had promises that the
Czar, after the accomplishment of such business, would send me back to
Holland, and that with a good reward in money proportionable to my
services. But alas! when we think we stand safest and most certain in
the hopes and conceits we have formed, there comes a wind unawares, and
in a wink blows away all the flimsy stuff whereon we had founded our
hopes so long.</p>

<p>Yet the Governor of Astrachan treated me like the Czar himself, and in
brief space I had all on a good footing; his old ammunition which was
quite spoiled and ruined and could do no harm to any, I refounded (as a
tinker makes new tin spoons out of old ones), which was then a thing
unheard of among the Russians; by reason of which and other arts of
mine some held me to be a sorcerer, others a new saint or prophet, and
others, again, for a second Empedocles or Gorgias Leontinus. But being
hard at work and busied at night in a powder-mill outside the
fortifications, I was in thievish wise captured and carried off by a
horde of Tartars, which took me with others so far into their country
that I not only could see the herb Borametz or sheep-plant growing but
did even eat thereof: which is a most strange vegetable; for it is like
a sheep to look upon, its wool can be spun and woven like natural
sheep's wool, and its flesh is so like to mutton that even the wolves
do love to eat thereof. But they that had captivated me did barter me
away for certain wares of China to the Tartars of Nuichi, which again
presented me as a rare gift to the King of Corea, with whom they had
but then made a truce. And there was I highly valued, for there could
none be found like me in the handling of sword and rapier; and there I
taught the king how, with his piece over his shoulder and his back
turned to the target, he could yet hit the bull's-eye; in reward for
which at my humble petition he gave me my liberty again, and let me go
by way of Japonia to the Portuguese of Macao, which made but small
count of me. So I went about among them like a sheep that has strayed
from the flock, till at last in marvellous fashion. I was captured by
Turkish corsairs, and by them, after they had dragged me about with
them for a full year among strange foreign nations that do inhabit the
isles of the East Indies, sold to certain merchants of Alexandria in
Egypt. These carried me with their wares to Constantinople, and because
the Turkish emperor was just then fitting out galleys against the
Venetians and needed rowers, therefore must many Turkish merchants part
with their Christian slaves (yet for ready payment), among whom I was
one, as being a strong young fellow. And now must I learn to row; which
heavy task nevertheless endured not more than two months: for our
galley was in the Levant right valiantly overcome by the Venetians, and
I with all my companions freed from the power of the Turks: and the
said galley being brought to Venice with rich booty and divers Turkish
prisoners of high degree, I was set at liberty, as wishing to go to
Rome and on pilgrimage to Loretto, to view those places and to thank
God for my deliverance. To which end I easily obtained a passport, and
moreover from several honourable persons, especially Germans,
reasonable help in money, so that now I could provide me with a
pilgrim's staff and enter on my journey.</p>

<p>So I betook me by the nearest way to Rome, where I fared right well,
for both from great and small I got me much alms; and tarrying there
nigh six weeks, I took my way with other pilgrims, of whom some
Germans, and especially certain Switzers, to Loretto: from whence I
came over the Saint Gotthard Pass back through Switzerland to my dad,
which had kept my farm for me; and nothing remarkable did I bring home
save a beard which I had grown in foreign parts.</p>

<p>Now had I been absent three years and some months, during which time I
had fared over the most distant seas and seen all manner of peoples,
but had commonly received from them more evil than good; of which a
whole book might be writ. And in the meanwhile the Westphalian treaty
had been concluded, so that I could now live with my dad in peace and
quiet: and him I left to manage and to keep house, but for myself I sat
down to my books, which were now both my work and my delight.</p>




		</section>
	</body>
</html>
