<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXVI: How He Was Imprisoned for a Traitor and Enchanter</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-2" id="chapter-2-26" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">How He Was Imprisoned for a Traitor and Enchanter</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>As soon as it was day my master handed me over to the horseboys, even as both armies were striking their tents: these were a pack of rascals, and therefore was the baiting which I must endure the greater and more dreadful: for they hastened with me to a thicket the better to satisfy their bestial desires, as is the custom of these devils’ children when a woman is given over to them: and there followed them many fellows looking on at their scurvy tricks, and among them my Hans, who let me not out of his sight, and when he saw ’twould go ill with me would rescue me by force, even should it cost him his head: who found backers enough when he said I was his betrothed wife; and they, showing pity for him and me, were ready to help. But that the boys, who thought they had the better right to me, and would not let such a good prize go, would not have, and went about to repel force with force. So blows beginning to be dealt on both sides, the crowd and the noise became greater and greater till it seemed almost like a tournament in which each did his best for a fair lady’s sake. All this terrible hubbub drew the Provost-general to the spot, who came even then when my clothing had been torn from my body and ’twas plain that I was no woman: his coming made all quiet as mice, for he was feared far more than the devil himself; and those that had been at fisticuffs scattered. But he briefly inquired of the matter, and whereas I hoped he would save me, on the contrary he arrested me, because it was a strange and suspicious thing for a man to be found in an army in women’s clothes. Accordingly, he and his men walked off with me to the regiments (which were all afoot and ready to march), with intent to deliver me to the Judge-Advocate-General, or Quartermaster-General: but when we were about to pass my colonel’s regiment, I was known and accosted and furnished by my colonel with some poor clothes, and so given in custody to our old provost, who put me in irons hand and foot.</p>
			<p>It was mighty hard work for me so to march in fetters, and the old curmudgeon would have properly plagued me had not the secretary Oliver paid for me; for I would not let my ducats, which I had thus far kept, see the light, for I should at the same time have lost them and also have fallen into greater danger. The said Oliver informed me the same evening why I was kept in such close custody, and the regimental sheriff received orders at once to examine me, that my deposition might the sooner be laid before the Judge-Advocate-General, for they counted me not only for a spy, but also for one that could use witchcraft; for shortly after I left my colonel certain witches were burnt who confessed before their death that they had seen me at their General Assembly, when they met together to dry up the Elbe, that Magdeburg might be taken the sooner. So the points on which I was to give an answer were these.</p>
			<ol>
				<li>
					<p>Whether I had not been a student, or at least could read and write?</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Why I had come to the camp at Magdeburg disguised as a fool, whereas in the captain’s service I had been as sane as I was now?</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Why I had disguised myself in women’s apparel?</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Whether I had not been at the witches’ dance with other sorcerers?</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Where I was born and who my parents were?</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Where I had sojourned before I came to the camp before Magdeburg? and</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Where and to what end I had learned women’s work such as washing, baking, cooking, and also lute-playing?</p>
				</li>
			</ol>
			<p>Thereupon I would have told my whole story, that the circumstances of my strange adventures might explain all; but the judge was not curious, only weary and peevish after his long march: so he desired only a round answer to each question; and that I answered in the following words, out of which no one could yet learn aught that was exact or precise⁠—as thus:</p>
			<ol>
				<li>
					<p>I had not been a student, but could read and write German.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>I had been forced to wear a fool’s coat because I had no other.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Because I was weary of the fool’s coat and could come at no men’s clothes.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>I answered yes; but had gone against my will and knew naught of witchcraft.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>I was born in the Spessart and my parents were peasants.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>With the Governor of Hanau and with a colonel of Croats, Corpes by name.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Among the Croats I had been forced against my will to learn cooking and the like: but lute-playing at Hanau because I had a liking thereto.</p>
				</li>
			</ol>
			<p>So when my deposition was written out, “How canst thou deny,” says he, “and say thou hast not studied, seeing that when thou didst pass for a fool, and the priest in the mass said ‘<q xml:lang="la">Domine non sum dignus</q>,’ thou didst answer in Latin that he need not say that, for all knew it.”</p>
			<p>“Sir,” said I, “others taught me that and persuaded me ’twas a prayer that one must use at mass, when our chaplain was saying it.” “Yes, yes,” said he, “I see thou art the very kind of fellow whose tongue must be loosed by the torture.” Whereat I thought, “God help thee if thy tongue follow thy foolish head!”</p>
			<p>Early next morning came orders from the Judge-Advocate-General to our provost that he should keep me well in charge; for he was minded as soon as the armies halted to examine me himself: in which case I must without doubt to the torture, had not God ordered it otherwise. In my bonds I thought ever of my pastor at Hanau and old Herzbruder that was dead, how both had foretold how it would fare with me if I were rid of my fool’s coat again.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
