<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-1" id="chapter-1-13" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:title">XIII: HOW SIMPLICISSIMUS WAS DRIVEN ABOUT LIKE A STRAW IN A WHIRLPOOL</h3>


<p class="continue">Now a few days after the hermit's decease I betook myself to the pastor
above mentioned and declared to him my master's death, and therewith
besought counsel from him how I should act in such a case. And though
he much dissuaded me from living longer in the forest, yet did I boldly
tread on in my predecessor's footsteps, inasmuch as for the whole
summer I did all that a holy monk should do. But as time changeth all
things, so by degrees the grief which I felt for my hermit grew less
and less, and the sharp cold of winter without quenched the heat of my
steadfast purpose within. And the more I began to falter the lazier did
I become in my prayers, for in place of dwelling ever upon godly and
heavenly thoughts, I let myself be overcome by the desire to see the
world: and inasmuch as for this purpose I could do no good in my
forest, I determined to go again to the said pastor and ask if he again
would counsel me to leave the wood. To that end I betook myself to his
village, which when I came thither I found in flames: for a party of
troopers had but now plundered and burned it, and of the peasants
killed some, driven some away, and some had made prisoners, among whom
was the pastor himself. Ah God, how full is man's life of care and
disappointment! Scarce hath one misfortune ended and lo! we are in
another. I wonder not that the heathen philosopher Timon set up many
gallows at Athens, whereon men might string themselves up, and so with
brief pain make an end to their wretched life. These troopers were even
now ready to march, and had the pastor fastened by a rope to lead him
away. Some cried, "Shoot him down, the rogue!" Others would have money
from him. But he, lifting up his hands to heaven, begged, for the sake
of the Last Judgment, for forbearance and Christian compassion, but in
vain; for one of them rode him down and dealt him such a blow on the
head that he fell flat, and commended his soul to God. Nor did the
remainder of the captured peasants fare any better. But even when it
seemed these troopers, in their cruel tyranny, had clean lost their
wits, came such a swarm of armed peasants out of the wood, that it
seemed a wasps'-nest had been stirred. And these began to yell so
frightfully and so furiously to attack with sword and musket that all
my hair stood on end; and never had I been at such a merrymaking
before: for the peasants of the Spessart and the Vogelsberg are as
little wont as are the Hessians and men of the Sauerland and the Black
Forest to let themselves be crowed over on their own dunghill. So away
went the troopers, and not only left behind the cattle they had
captured, but threw away bag and baggage also, and so cast all their
booty to the winds lest themselves should become booty for the
peasants: yet some of them fell into their hands. This sport took from
me well-nigh all desire to see the world, for I thought, if 'tis all
like this, then is the wilderness far more pleasant. Yet would I fain
hear what the pastor had to say of it, who was, by reason of wounds and
blows received, faint, weak, and feeble. Yet he made shift to tell me
he knew not how to help or advise me, since he himself was now in a
plight in which he might well have to seek his bread by begging, and if
I should remain longer in the woods, I could hope no more for help from
him; since, as I saw with my own eyes, both his church and his
parsonage were in flames. Thereupon I betook myself sorrowfully to my
dwelling in the wood, and because on this journey I had been but little
comforted, yet on the other hand had become more full of pious
thoughts, therefore I resolved never more to leave the wilderness: and
already I pondered whether it were not possible for me to live without
salt (which the pastor had until now furnished me with) and so do
without mankind altogether.</p>




		</section>
	</body>
</html>
