<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-5" id="chapter-5-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:title">IV: IN WHAT MANNER SIMPLICISSIMUS AND HERZBRUDER WENT TO THE WARS AGAIN AND RETURNED THENCE</h3>


<p class="continue">Things be strangely ordered in this changeful world; 'Tis said he that
should know all things would soon be rich: but I say he that always
could seize his opportunity would soon be great and powerful. For many
a skinflint or cheese-parer (both which honourable titles are given to
misers) gets rich enough by knowing and using some knack of gain: yet
is he not therefore great, but is and remaineth always of less
estimation than when he was poor: but he that can make himself great
and powerful, him riches follow after close. So did luck, that is wont
to give power and riches, look on me favourably for once, and gave me
when I had been some eight days in Vienna opportunity in hand to mount
upon the rungs of fame without hindrance: yet I did it not. And why? I
hold 'twas because my fate had willed for me another road, namely, that
along which my foolishness did lead me.</p>

<p>For the Count von der Wahl, under whose command I had before made
myself famous in Westphalia, was even then in Vienna when I came
thither with Herzbruder: which last was at a banquet when divers
Imperialist councillors of war were present with the Count of Götz and
others, where the talk was of all manner of strange fellows, soldiers
of different qualities, and famous partisans: and there was mention
made of the huntsman of Soest, and such famous exploits of him told
that some wondered at the youth of the fellow and lamented that the
crafty Hessian colonel Saint André had hung a weight round his neck so
that he must either lay aside the sword or serve under Swedish colours:
for the said Count von der Wahl had found out all the trick which the
same colonel had played me at Lippstadt. Herzbruder, that was there
present and would fain have forwarded my interest, asked for indulgence
and leave to speak, and said he knew that huntsman of Soest better than
any man in the world, which was not only a good soldier that feared not
the smell of powder, but also a good rider, a perfected fencer, an
excellent professor of musquetry and artillery, and besides all this
one that would yield place to no engineer in the world: that he had
left not only his wife (that had been so shamefully imposed upon him),
but all that he had at Lippstadt, and again sought the emperor's
service, and so had in the last campaign served under the Count of
Götz, and being then taken by the troops of Weimar and desiring to
return to the Imperialists, had with his comrade slain a corporal and
six musqueteers that had pursued them and would bring them back, and
had earned rich booty thereby, and so had come with him to Vienna with
intent to offer his service once more against his Imperial Majesty's
enemies, provided only he could have such terms as suited him: for as a
common soldier he would serve no more.</p>

<p>By this time the worshipful company were so flustered with good liquor
that they must satisfy their curiosity to see the huntsman: to which
end Herzbruder was sent to fetch me in a coach: who on the way
instructed me how I should carry myself among these persons of quality,
since my fortune in time to come depended on this. So when I came to
them, at first I answered all questions very short and sententiously,
so that they began to admire me as one who said nothing that had not a
prudent meaning: in a word, I so presented myself that I pleased all,
besides this, that I had from Count von Wahl the reputation of a good
soldier. But with all this I got drunk, and well can I believe that in
that condition I proved to all how little I had been at court. And this
was the end of it all: that a colonel of foot promised me a company in
his regiment, which I refused not: for I thought, "To be a captain is
indeed no trifle." Yet Herzbruder next day rebuked me for my folly, and
said, had I but held out longer I had risen to high rank.</p>

<p>So was I presented to a company as their captain, which company,
although with me 'twas in respect of officers fully staffed, yet
counted no more than seven privates that could stand sentry. Besides,
my under-officers were such old cripples that I must needs scratch my
head when I looked upon them. And so it came about that in the next
engagement, which happened not long after, I was with them miserably
beaten: in which affair Count von Götz lost his life and Herzbruder his
testicles, which were shot away: and I had my share in the leg though
'twas but a trifling wound. Whereupon we betook ourselves to Vienna,
there to be cured, and also because we had there left all our property.
But besides these wounds, which were soon healed, there appeared in
Herzbruder other evil symptoms which the doctors could not at first
recognise, for he was paralysed in all his extremities like a choleric
person whom his gall doth plague, to which complexion he was no more
given than to anger. Nevertheless he was counselled to take the waters,
and to that end the Griesbach in the Black Forest was commended to him.
And so doth fortune suddenly change. For Herzbruder just before had
been minded to marry a young lady of quality, and to that end to get
him made a Freiherr and me a nobleman: but now must he make other
plans; for having lost that by which he had meant to propagate his
family, and being, moreover, threatened with a tedious sickness ensuing
upon that loss, in which he would have need of good friends, he made
his will, and appointed me heir of all his property, the more so
because he saw how for his sake I cast my fortune to the winds and gave
up my command, that I might bear him company to the Spa and there wait
on him till he should recover his health.</p>




		</section>
	</body>
</html>
