<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-4" id="chapter-4-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:title">VII: HOW THE DOCTOR WAS FITTED WITH A MUSQUET UNDER CAPTAIN CURMUDGEON</h3>


<p class="continue">Now as I passed through Lorraine, my wares gave out, and because I must
avoid garrison-towns I had no chance to get more: so must I devise
another plan till I could make electuary again. So I bought me two
measures of Branntwein and coloured it with saffron, and sold it in
half-ounce glasses to the people as a gold water of great price, good
against fever, and so my two measures brought me in thirty gulden. But
my little glasses running short, and I hearing of a glass-maker that
dwelt in the county of Fleckenstein, I betook myself thither to equip
myself afresh, but seeking for by-paths was by chance caught by a
picket from Philippsburg that was quartered in the castle of
Wagelnburg, and so lost all that I had wrung out of the people by my
cheats on the journey; and because the peasant that went with me to
shew the way told the fellows I was a doctor, as a doctor I must
willy-nilly be taken to Philippsburg. There was I examined and spared
not to say who I was in truth; which they believed not, but would make
more of me than I could well be: for I should and must remain a doctor.
Then must I swear I belonged to the Emperor's dragoons in Soest and
declare on my oath all that had happened to me from then to now and
what I now intended. "But," said they, "the Emperor had need of
soldiers as much at Philippsburg as at Soest: and so would they give me
entertainment, till I had good opportunity to come to my regiment: but
if this plan was not to my taste, I might content myself to remain in
prison and be treated as a doctor till I should be released; for as a
doctor I had been taken."</p>

<p>So I came down from a horse to a donkey, and must become a musqueteer
against my will: which vexed me mightily, for want was master there,
and the rations terrible small: I say not to no purpose "terrible" for
I was terrified every morning when I received mine: for I knew I must
make that suffice for the whole day which I could have made away with
at a meal without trouble. And to tell truth 'tis a poor creature, a
musqueteer, that must so pass his life in a garrison, and make dry
bread suffice him--yea, and not half enough of that: for he is naught
else than a prisoner that prolongs his miserable life with the bread
and water of tribulation: nay, a prisoner hath the better lot, for he
needs neither to watch, nor to go the rounds, nor stand sentry, but
lies at rest and has as much hope as any such poor garrison-soldier in
time at length to get out of his prison. 'Tis true there were some that
bettered their condition, and that in divers ways, but none that
pleased me and seemed to me a reputable way to gain my food. For some
in this miserable plight took to themselves wives (yea, the most vile
women at need) for no other cause than to be kept by the said women's
work, either with sewing, washing and spinning, or with selling of old
clothes and higgling, or even with stealing: there was a she-ensign
among the women that drew her pay as a corporal: another was a midwife,
and so earned many a good meal for herself and her husband: another
could starch and wash: others laundered for the unmarried soldiers and
officers shirts, stockings, sleeping-breeches and I know not what else,
from which they had each her special name. Others did sell tobacco and
provide pipes for the fellows that had need of them: others dealt in
Branntwein: another was a seamstress, and could do all manner of
embroidery and cut patterns to earn money: another gained a livelihood
from the fields only; in winter she gathered snails, in spring
salad-herbs, in summer she took birds'-nests, and in autumn she would
gather fruit of all kinds: a few carried wood for sale like asses, and
others traded with this and that. Yet to gain my support in such a way
was not for me: for I had a wife already. Other fellows did gain a
livelihood by play, for at that they were better than sharpers and
could get their simple comrades' money from them with false dice: but
such a profession I loathed. Others toiled like beasts of burden at the
ramparts; but for that I was too lazy: and some knew and could practise
a trade, but I, poor creature, had learned none such: 'tis true if any
had had need of a musician I could have filled the place well, but that
land of hunger was content with drums and fifes. Some stood sentry for
others and night and day came never off duty, but I would sooner starve
than so torment my body: some got them booty by expeditions: but I was
not even trusted to go outside the gates: others could go a-mousing
better than any cat, but such a trade I hated worse than the plague. In
a word, wherever I turned, I could hit on no way to fill my belly. Yet
what vexed me most of all was this, that I must needs endure all manner
of gibes when my comrades said, "What, thou a doctor, and hast no art
but to starve?"</p>

<p>At length did hunger force me to inveigle a few fine carp out of the
town ditch up to me on the wall: but as soon as the colonel was ware of
it I must ride the torture-horse for it, and was forbidden on pain of
death to exercise that art further. At the last others' misfortune
proved my good luck. For having cured a few patients of jaundice and
two of fever (all which must have had a particular belief in me), it
was allowed me to go out of the fortress on the pretence of collecting
roots and herbs for my medicines: instead of which I did set snares for
hares and had the luck to catch two the first night: these I brought to
the colonel, and so got not only a thaler as a present, but also leave
to go out and catch hares whensoever I was not on duty. Now because the
country was waste and no man there to catch the beasts, which had
therefore mightily multiplied, there came grist to my mill again,
insomuch that it seemed as if it rained hares, or as if I could charm
them into my snares. So when the officers saw they could trust me I was
allowed to go out on plundering parties: and there I began again my
life as at Soest, save that I might no longer lead and command such
parties as heretofore in Westphalia; for for that 'twas needful to know
all highways and byways and to be well acquainted with the Rhine
stream.</p>




		</section>
	</body>
</html>
