<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-3" id="chapter-3-22" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:title">XXII: HOW SIMPLICISSIMUS HELD HIS WEDDING-FEAST AND HOW HE PURPOSED TO BEGIN HIS NEW LIFE</h3>

<p>The people at my lodging were all astonished when I brought the young
maid home with me, and yet more when they saw how unconcernedly she
went to bed with me. For though this trick which had been played me
stirred up great perplexity in my mind, yet was I not so foolish as to
put my bride to shame. And so even while I had my dear in mine arms I
had a thousand conceits in my head, how I should begin and end my
behaviour in this matter. Now thought I, "Thou art rightly served": and
yet again I considered that I had met with the greatest disgrace in the
world, which I could not in honour pass over without due revenge. But
when I remembered me that such revenge must harm my father-in-law and
also my gentle and innocent bride, then all my plans were naught. At
one time I was so sore ashamed that I planned to shut myself up and let
no man see me again, and again I reflected that that would be to commit
the chief and greatest folly. At the last I concluded that I would
before all things win my father-in-law's friendship again, and would so
carry myself to all others as if nothing had happened untoward, and as
if I had made all things ready for my wedding. For, said I to myself,
"Seeing that this business hath had a strange beginning, thou must give
it a like end: for should folk know thou wast trapped in thy marriage
and wedded like a poor maiden to a rich old cripple, mockery only will
be thy portion."</p>

<p>Being full of such thoughts, I rose betimes, though I had rather have
lain longer. And first of all I sent to my brother-in-law who had
married my wife's sister, and told him in a word how near akin to him I
now was, and besought him to suffer his good wife to come and help to
prepare somewhat wherewith I might entertain people at my wedding, and
if he would be so good as to plead with our father and mother-in-law on
my behalf, I would in the meantime busy myself to invite such guests as
would promote a peace between me and him. The which he took upon him to
do, and I betook myself to the commandant, to whom I told in merry
fashion how quaint a device my father-in-law and I had hatched for
making up of a match, which device was so swift of operation that I had
in a single hour accomplished the betrothal, the wedding, and the
bedding. But inasmuch as my father-in-law had grudged me the morning
draught, I was minded instead thereof to bid certain honourable guests
to the wedding-supper, to which also I respectfully begged to invite
himself.</p>

<p>The commandant was fit to burst with laughter at my comical story, and
because I saw him in merry mood I made yet more free, giving as my
excuse that I could not well be reasonable at such a time, seeing that
bridegrooms for full four weeks before and after their wedding were
never in their sober senses: but whereas they could play the fool
without attracting note and in their four weeks by degrees return to
their senses, I had had the whole business of matrimony thrust upon me
in a wink, and so must play my tricks all at once, so as thereafter to
enact the sober married man more reasonably. Then he demanded me what
of the dowry, and how much of the rhino my father-in-law had given for
the wedding-feast--for of that, said he, the old curmudgeon had plenty.
So I answered him that our marriage settlement consisted but in one
clause--viz., that his daughter and I should never come in his sight
again. But forasmuch as there was neither notary nor witness present I
hoped the clause might be revoked, and that the more so because all
marriages should tend to the furthering of good fellowship. So with
such merry quips, which no one at such a time would have looked for
from me, I obtained that the commandant and my father-in-law, whom he
undertook to persuade, would appear at my wedding-supper. He sent
likewise a cask of wine and a buck to my kitchen: and I made
preparation as if I were to entertain princes, and indeed brought
together a noble company, which did not only make merry with one
another, but in the face of all men did so reconcile my father and
mother-in-law with me that they gave me more blessing that night than
cursing the night before. And so 'twas noised all over the town that
our wedding had been of intent so arranged, lest any ill-natured folk
should play some jest upon us. And me this speedy settlement of things
suited full well. For had I come to be married with my banns called
beforehand, as is the usage, 'twas much to be feared there would have
been some baggages that would have given a world of trouble by way of
hindrance: for I had among the burghers' daughters a round half-dozen
that knew me only too well.</p>

<p>The next day my father-in-law treated my wedding-guests, but not so
well as I by far, being miserly. And then I must first say what
profession I was minded to follow, and how I would maintain my
household: wherein I was first aware that I had now lost my noble
freedom and must live henceforth under orders. Yet I carried myself
obediently and was beforehand in asking my dear father-in-law, as a
prudent gentleman, for his advice, to digest and to follow it: which
speech the commandant approved and said, "This being a brisk young
soldier, it were great folly that in the present wars he should think
to follow any but the soldier's trade: for 'tis far better to stable
one's horse in another man's stall than to feed another's nag in one's
own. And so far as I am concerned, I promise him a company whenever he
will."</p>

<p>For this my father-in-law and I returned thanks, and I refused no more,
but shewed the commandant the merchant's receipt, which had my treasure
in keeping at Cologne. "And this," said I, "I must first fetch away
before I take service with the Swedes: for should they learn that I
served their enemies, they of Cologne would laugh me to scorn and keep
my treasure, which is not of such a kind as one can easily find by the
roadside." This they approved, and so 'twas concluded promised and
resolved between us three I should within a few days betake myself to
Cologne, possess myself of my treasure, and so return to the fortress
and there take command of my company. Furthermore a day was named on
which a company should be made over to my father-in-law, together with
the commission of lieutenant-colonel in the commandant's regiment. For
Count Götz lying in Westphalia with many Imperial troops and his
headquarters at Dortmund, my commandant looked to be besieged next
spring, and so was seeking to enlist good soldiers. Yet was this care
of his in vain: for the said Count Götz was, by reason of the defeat of
John de Werth in the Breisgau, forced to leave Westphalia that same
spring and take the field against the Duke of Weimar on the Rhine.</p>




		</section>
	</body>
</html>
