<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-1" id="chapter-1-28" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:title">XXVIII: HOW SIMPLICISSIMUS GOT TWO EYES OUT OF ONE CALF'S-HEAD</h3>


<p class="continue">The next day after my discourse with the secretary my master had
appointed a princely entertainment for his officers and other good
friends; for he had received the good news that his men had taken the
strong castle of Braunfels without loss of a single man: and there must
I, as at that time 'twas my duty, like any other table-server, help to
bring up dishes, pour out wine, and wait at table with a plate in my
hand. The first day there was a big fat calf's-head (of which folk are
wont to say no poor man may eat) handed to me to carry up. And because
this calf's-head was soft-boiled, therefore he must needs have his
whole eye with the appurtenance thereof hanging out; which was to me a
charming and a tempting sight, and the fresh perfume of the bacon-broth
and ginger sprinkled thereon alluring me, I felt such appetite that my
mouth did water at it. In a word, the eye smiled at once on mine eyes,
my nostrils, and my mouth, and besought me that I would incorporate it
into my hungry belly. Nor did I need long forcing, but followed my
desires; for as I went, with a spoon that I had first received on that
same day I did scoop the eye so masterly out, and sent it so swiftly
and without let or hindrance to its proper place, that none perceived
it till the dish came to table and there betrayed itself and me. For
when they would carve it up, and one of its daintiest members was
wanting, my lord at once perceived what made the carver start: and he
was not a man to endure such mockery as that any should dare to say to
him he had served up a calf's-head with one eye. So the cook must
appear at table, and they that should have brought the dishes up were
with him examined: and last of all it came out that 'twas to poor
Simplicissimus the calf's-head had last been entrusted, and that with
two eyes: how it had fared thereafter no man could say. Then my lord,
as it seemed to me with a terrible countenance, asked what I had done
with the calf's eye. So I whipt my spoon out of my pouch again and gave
the calf's-head the second turn, and shewed briefly and well what they
asked of me, for I swallowed the second eye like the first, in a wink.</p>

<p>"Pardieu," quoth my lord, "this trick savoureth better than ten
calves." And thereupon all the gentlemen present praised that saying
and spoke of my deed, which I had done for pure simplicity, as a
wondrous device and a presage of future boldness and fearless and swift
resolution: so that for this time, by the repeating of the very trick
for which I had deserved punishment I not only escaped that punishment,
but from a few merry jesters, flatterers, and boon companions gained
the praise of acting wisely, inasmuch as I had lodged both eyes
together, that so they might in the next world, as in this, afford help
and company to each other, to which end they were at first appointed by
nature. Yet my lord warned me to play him no more such tricks.</p>




		</section>
	</body>
</html>
